1
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
INTRODUCTION
 Launched by: Union Minister of Commerce and Industry, Shri Piyush Goyal launched the
Foreign Trade Policy 2023.
 Export Scenario: India's overall exports, including services and merchandise exports, has
already crossed US$ 750 Billion and is expected to cross US$ 760 Billion this year.
 Key Approach: The Key Approach to the policy is based on these 4 pillars:
o Incentive to Remission.
o Export promotion through collaboration - Exporters, States, Districts, Indian
Missions.
o Ease of doing business, reduction in transaction costs and e-initiatives.

-- 1 of 26 --

2
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
o Emerging Areas – E-Commerce Developing Districts as Export Hubs and streamlining
SCOMET policy.
 About FTP:
o Foreign Trade Policy - 2023 is effective from 01-04-2023
o Released by Directorate General of Foreign Trade, Department of Commerce, Ministry
of Commerce and Industry
o Foreign Trade Policy (2023) is a policy document which is based on continuity of
time-tested schemes facilitating exports as well as a document which is nimble
and responsive to the requirements of trade.
o It is based on principles of ‘trust’ and ‘partnership’ with exporters.
o In the FTP 2015-20, changes were made subsequent to the initial release even
without announcement of a new FTP responding dynamically to the emerging
situations.
o Hereafter, the revisions of the FTP shall be done as and when required.
o Incorporating feedback from Trade and Industry would also be continuous to
streamline processes and update FTP, from time to time.
 Aims:
o The FTP 2023 aims at process re-engineering and automation to facilitate ease of
doing business for exporters.
o It also focuses on emerging areas like dual use high end technology items under
SCOMET, facilitating e-commerce export, collaborating with States and Districts for
export promotion.
 Changes Brought:
o The new FTP is introducing a one-time Amnesty Scheme for exporters to close the old
pending authorizations and start afresh.
o FTP 2023 encourages recognition of new towns through “Towns of Export Excellence
Scheme” and exporters through “Status Holder Scheme”.
o The FTP 2023 is facilitating exports by streamlining the popular Advance
Authorization and EPCG schemes and enabling merchanting trade from India
CH 1: Legal Framework and Trade Facilitation

-- 2 of 26 --

3
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
 The Foreign Trade Policy (FTP) 2023 is notified by Central Government, in exercise of
powers conferred under Section 5 of the Foreign Trade (Development & Regulation) Act,
1992.
 Bill of Lading and Shipping Bill are the key documents for deciding the date of import and
export respectively.
 For operational listing of ICLC (Irrevocable Commercial Letter of Credit), the applicant
shall have to register the ICLC with jurisdictional RA against computerized receipt within
15 days of imposition of any such restriction/ regulation.
 India has ratified the World Trade Organization’s Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) in
April 2016. To facilitate coordination and implementation of the TFA provisions, an inter-
ministerial body i.e., National Committee on Trade Facilitation (NCTF) has been
constituted.
 TFA emanates from the following four pillars:
Transparency, Technology, Simplification of Procedures and Risk based assessment,
and Infrastructure Augmentation.
 National Trade Facilitation Action Plan aims to achieve: -
 Improvement in Ease of Doing Business through reduction in transaction cost and
time.
 Reduction in cargo release time
 A paperless regulatory environment
 A transparent and predictable legal regime
 Improved investment climate through better infrastructure
 DGFT has a commitment to function as a facilitator of exports and imports. In order to
facilitate international trade, DGFT consults various Export Promotion Councils as well as
Trade and Industry bodies from time to time.
 No seizure shall be made by any agency so as to disrupt manufacturing activity and
delivery schedule of exports. In exceptional cases, concerned agency may seize the stock
on the basis of prima facie evidence of serious irregularity. However, such seizure
should be lifted within 7 days unless the irregularities are substantiated.
 To reduce transaction and handling costs, a single window system to facilitate export of
perishable agricultural produce is being facilitated through Agricultural and Processed
Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA).
 DGFT is implementing the Niryat Bandhu Scheme for mentoring new and potential
exporter on the intricacies of foreign trade through counseling, training and outreach
programmes including the ‘Districts as Export Hubs’ initiative with ‘industry partners’,

-- 3 of 26 --

4
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
‘knowledge partners’ and other stakeholders to create vibrant District-Product-Market
relevant knowledge ecosystem.
 Importer Exporter Code (IEC), issued by DGFT is mandatory for export/ import from/to
India.
 An IEC is a 10-character alpha-numeric number allotted to an entity (firm/company/LLP
etc.) and is mandatory for undertaking any export/import activities.
 e-BRC (Electronic Bank Realization Certificate) has enabled DGFT to capture details of
realization of export proceeds directly from the Banks through secured electronic mode.
 RBI has also developed a comprehensive IT-based system called Export Data
Processing and Monitoring System (EDPMS) for monitoring of export of goods and
software and facilitating AD banks to report various returns through a single platform.
 Based upon World Customs Organization (WCO)’s SAFE Framework of Standards,
‘Authorized Economic Operator (AEO) programme’ has been developed by Indian
Customs to enable business involved in the international trade to reap the benefits.
 Selected towns producing goods of Rs. 750 Crore or more may be notified as Towns of
Export Excellence (TEE) based on potential for growth in exports. However, for TEE in
Handloom, Handicraft, Agriculture and Fisheries sector, threshold limit would be
Rs.150 Crore.
 An inter-ministerial committee to be set up to examine MSME trade related grievances
which have policy ramifications. This will expedite decision making with a ‘whole of
government approach’.
 With a view to expand employment opportunities, certain special focus initiatives for
Marine Products and Sports Goods & Toys sectors are required.
These sectors are being provided the following duty free entitlements (only basic customs
duty is exempted) as per the relevant Customs Notifications:
a) Marine Sector - Duty free import of specified specialized inputs/ chemicals and
flavoring oils not exceeding 1% of FOB value of seafood exports during the
preceding financial year.
b) Sports Goods and Toys - Duty free import of specified inputs not exceeding 3% of
FOB value of sports goods exports during the preceding financial year.
 The objective behind certifying certain exporter firms as
“Status Holder” is to recognize such exporter firms as business
leaders who have excelled in international trade and have
successfully contributed to country’s foreign trade.
 Status Holder Categories:

-- 4 of 26 --

5
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
 Input-Output norms may be fixed on priority within 60 days by the Norms Committee;
Special scheme in respect of Input Output Norms to be notified by DGFT from time to time,
for specified status holder.
 Status holders shall be entitled to export freely exportable items (excluding Gems and
Jewelry, Articles of Gold and precious metals) on free of cost basis for export promotion
subject to an annual limit of Rupees One Crore or 2% of average annual export
realization during preceding three licensing years, whichever is lower.
 To improve the trade ecosystem by enhancing the available skilling opportunities,
Status Holders are being made “partners” in providing mentoring and training in
international trade. Status Holders will endeavor to provide skill upgradation/ training in
international trade as detailed below:
CHAPTER 02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
REGARDING IMPORTS AND EXPORTS
 Exports and Imports shall be ‘Free’ except when regulated by way of ‘Prohibition’,
‘Restriction’ or ‘Exclusive trading through State Trading Enterprises (STEs)’ as laid
down in Indian Trade Classification (Harmonized System) [ITC (HS)] of Exports and
Imports.

-- 5 of 26 --

6
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
 ITC(HS) is a compilation of codes for all merchandise / goods for export/ import. Goods
are classified based on their group or sub-group at 2/4/6/8 digits.
 ITC (HS) is aligned at 6-digit level with international Harmonized System goods
nomenclature maintained by World Customs Organization. However, India maintains
national Harmonized System of goods at 8-digit level notified under First Schedule of
the Customs Tariff Act,1975.
 DGFT may specify Procedures to be followed by an exporter or importer or by any
licensing/Regional Authority (RA) or by any other authority for purposes of
implementation.
 Import of goods, including those purchased from e-commerce portals, through post
or courier, where Customs clearance is sought as gifts, is prohibited except for life
saving drugs/ medicines and Rakhi (but not gifts related to Rakhi).
Explanation: Rakhi (but not gifts related to Rakhi) will be covered under Section 25(6)
of Customs Act, 1962 that reads that “no duty shall be collected if the amount of duty
leviable is equal to or less than Rs. 100/-”
 Export Promotion Councils (EPCs) are organizations of exporters, set up with the
objective to promote and develop Indian exports. Each Council is responsible for the
promotion of a particular group of products/ projects/services.
 Merchanting trade involving shipment of goods from one foreign country to another
foreign country without touching Indian ports, involving an Indian intermediary is
allowed subject to compliance with RBI guidelines, except for goods/items in the
CITES and SCOMET list.
 EPCs are also eligible to function as Registering Authorities to issue Registration-
cum-Membership Certificate (RCMC) to its members.
 DGFT may in public interest pass such orders or grant such exemption, relaxation, or
relief, as he may deem fit and proper, on grounds of genuine hardship and adverse
impact on trade to any person or class or category of persons from any provision of FTP
or any Procedures.
While granting such exemption, DGFT may impose such conditions as he may deem fit
after consulting the Committees as under:

-- 6 of 26 --

7
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
 Mandatory documents required for export of goods from India:
1. Bill of Lading/ Airway Bill/ Lorry Receipt/ Railway Receipt/Postal Receipt
2. Commercial Invoice cum Packing List
3. Shipping Bill/Bill of Export/ Postal Bill of Export
 Mandatory documents required for import of goods into India:
1. Bill of Lading/Airway Bill/Lorry Receipt/ Railway Receipt/Postal Receipt in
form CN-22 or CN 23 as the case may be.
2. Commercial Invoice cum Packing List
3. Bill of Entry
 Goods including edible items, of value not exceeding Rs.5,00,000/- in a licensing year,
may be exported as a gift. However, items mentioned as restricted for exports in ITC(HS)
shall not be exported as a gift, without an authorization.
 All export contracts and invoices shall be denominated either in freely convertible
currency or Indian rupees, but export proceeds shall be realized in freely convertible
currency.
 Export Credit Agencies (ECAs) are policy instruments for the Government to support
exports. ECAs support exports by
insurance, guarantee and also direct
lending. Export Credit Agencies
(ECAs) like Export Credit Guarantee
Corporation of India Ltd. (ECGC)
provides credit insurance support to
exports and export credit lending.

-- 7 of 26 --

8
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
 Export Promotion Councils (EPCs) are organizations of exporters, set up with the
objective to promote and develop Indian exports.
 DGFT may in public interest pass such orders or grant such exemption, relaxation or
relief, as he may deem fit and proper, on grounds of genuine hardship and adverse impact
on trade to any person or class or category of persons from any provision of FTP or any
Procedures. While granting such exemption, DGFT may impose such conditions as he
may deem fit after consulting the Committees as under:
 Any person, applying for an authorization to import/ export under the FTP (except
items listed as ‘Restricted’ items in ITC (HS)) or applying for any other benefit or
concession under FTP, shall be required to provide, the RCMC granted by competent
authority.
 A Policy Interpretation Committee (PIC) may be constituted to aid and advise DGFT.
The composition of the PIC would be as follows:
i. DGFT: Chairman
ii. All Additional DGFTs in Headquarters: Members
iii. All Joint DGFTs in Headquarters looking after Policy matters: Members
iv. (Joint DGFT (PRC/PIC): Member Secretary
v. Any other person / representative of the concerned Ministry / Department, to be
co-opted by the Chairman.
CHAPTER 03 - DEVELOPING DISTRICTS AS
EXPORT HUBS

-- 8 of 26 --

9
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
 Products/services (GI products, agricultural clusters, toy clusters etc.) with export
potential in each District have to be identified and institutional mechanism in the form of
District Export Promotion Committees (DEPCs) at the district level is to be created to
provide support for export promotion and address the bottlenecks for export growth in the
districts.
 The District Export Action Plan (DEAP) may be prepared for each district. 2-3 high
potential products/services from the districts may be prioritized and a comprehensive
plan for their export growth may be prepared.
 To synergize the efforts of the Department of Commerce/ DGFT and the State/UT
governments in promotion of exports from the State, each State shall constitute a State
Export Promotion Committee (SEPC) headed by Chief Secretary of the State.
 DGFT would develop an online monitoring portal that may be accessed on the DGFT
website to enable the States/ DGFT Regional Authorities to upload all information related
to the products/services with export potential of every District.
 The training and development needs of District industries may be identified, and
training may be coordinated with other departments.
 Department of Commerce schemes such as Market Access Initiative, Niryat Bandhu
scheme etc. may also give priority to district specific needs identified under the District
Export Action Plan.
CHAPTER 04 - DUTY EXEMPTION REMISSION
SCHEMES
 Schemes:
(a) Duty Exemption Schemes:
 Advance Authorization (AA) (which will include Advance Authorization for Annual
Requirement).
 Duty Free Import Authorization (DFIA).
(b) Duty Remission Scheme: Duty Drawback (DBK) Scheme, administered by Department of
Revenue.
(c) Scheme for Rebate on State and Central Taxes and Levies (RoSCTL), as notified by the
Ministry of Textiles.

-- 9 of 26 --

10
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
(d) Schemes for Remission of Duties and Taxes on Exported Products (RoDTEP) notified by
Department of Commerce and administered by Department of Revenue.
Advance Authorization (AA):
 Advance Authorization is issued to allow duty free import of input, which is physically
incorporated in export product (making normal allowance for wastage).
 Advance Authorization can be issued either to a manufacturer exporter or merchant
exporter tied to supporting manufacturer.
 The minimum value addition required to be achieved under Advance Authorization is
15%.
 “Gold jewellery, including partly processed jewellery, and articles including medallions
and coins (excluding legal tender coins), whether plain or studded, containing gold of 8
carats and above up to a maximum limit of 22 carats.
 Advance Authorization for Annual Requirement shall only be issued for items notified in
Standard Input Output Norms (SION).
Self-Ratification Scheme:
 Where there is no SION/valid Ad hoc Norms for an export product or where SION has
been notified but exporter intends to use additional inputs in the manufacturing process,
eligible exporter can apply for an Advance Authorization under a scheme on self-
declaration and self-ratification basis.
 Advance Authorization and / or material imported under Advance Authorization shall be
subject to ‘Actual User’ condition.
 Advance Authorization shall also be available where some or all inputs are supplied free
of cost to exporter by foreign buyers.
Duty Free Import Authorization (DFIA):
 Duty Free Import Authorization is issued to allow duty free import of inputs. In
addition, import of oil and catalyst which is consumed/ utilized in the process of
production of export product, may also be allowed.
 Duty Free Import Authorization shall be exempted only from payment of Basic Customs
Duty (BCD).

-- 10 of 26 --

11
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
 Duty Free Import Authorization shall be issued on post export basis for products for which
Standard Input Output Norms have been notified.
 A minimum value addition of 20% shall be required to be achieved.
 Regional Authority shall issue transferable DFIA with a validity of 12 months from the
date of issue.
 SCHEMES FOR EXPORTERS OF GEMS AND JEWELLERY:
 export of gold jewelry, including partly processed jewelry, whether plain or studded,
and articles, containing gold of 8 carats and above up to a maximum limit of 22
carats only shall be permitted.
 export of Gold religious idols (only gods and goddess) of 8 carats and above (up to 24
carats) shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:
 Exports would be subject to 100% examination by the Approved Government
Valuer.
 Foreign remittance has to be realized within a period of 3 months from the
date of export.
 Export of Silver jewellery including partly processed jewellery, silverware, silver
strips and articles including medallions and coins (excluding legal tender coins and
any engineering goods) containing more than 50% silver by weight shall be permitted;
 Export of Platinum jewellery including partly processed jewellery and articles
including medallions and coins (excluding legal tender coins and any engineering
goods) containing more than 50% platinum by weight shall be permitted.
 The schemes are as follows:
 Advance Procurement/ Replenishment of Precious Metals from Nominated
Agencies;
 Replenishment Authorisation for Gems;
 Replenishment Authorisation for Consumables;
 Advance Authorisation for Precious Metals
 Duty Free Import Authorisation scheme shall not be available for Gems and Jewellery
sector.
 An exporter (with annual export turnover of Rs 5 crores for each of the last three
years) or the authorized offices/ agencies in India of laboratories may export cut &
polished diamonds (each of 0.25 carat or above) to any of the approved

-- 11 of 26 --

12
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
agencies/laboratories with re-import facility at zero duty within 3 months from the
date of export. Such facility of re- import at zero duty will be subject to guidelines
issued by Central Board of Customs & Excise, Department of Revenue.
 Export of jewellery through Foreign Post Office including via Speed Post is allowed.
The jewellery parcel shall not exceed 20 kgs by weight.
 A bank authorized by Reserve Bank of India is allowed export of gold scrap for
refining and import standard gold bars as per Reserve Bank of India guidelines.
 RODTEP (Remission of Duties and Taxes on Exported Products) scheme:
 Scheme’s objective is to refund, currently unrefunded:
(a) Duties/ taxes / levies, at the Central, State and local level, borne on the
exported product, including prior stage cumulative indirect taxes on goods and
services used in the production of the exported product and
(b) Such indirect Duties/ taxes / levies in respect of distribution of exported
product.
 The rebate under the Scheme shall not be available in respect of duties and
taxes already exempted or remitted or credited.
 The determination of ceiling rates under the Scheme will be done by a
Committee in the Department of Revenue/Drawback Division with suitable
representation of the DoC/DGFT, line ministries and experts, on the sectors
prioritized by Department of Commerce and Department of Revenue.
 Under the Scheme, a rebate would be granted to eligible exporters at a notified
rate as a percentage of FOB (Free on board) value with a value cap per unit of the
exported product, wherever required, on export of items which are categorized under
the notified 8 digit HS Code.
 Residual issues related to the Scheme arising subsequently shall be considered by
an Inter-Ministerial Committee, named as “RODTEP Policy Committee (RPC)”
chaired by DGFT (comprising members of Department of Commerce and Department
of Revenue), whose decisions would be binding.

-- 12 of 26 --

13
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
CHAPTER 05 - EXPORT PROMOTION CAPITAL
GOODS (EPCG) SCHEME
 The objective of the EPCG Scheme is to facilitate import of capital goods for producing
quality goods and services and enhance India’s manufacturing competitiveness.
 EPCG Scheme allows import of capital goods for preproduction, production and post-
production at zero customs duty.
 Import under EPCG Scheme shall be subject to an Export Obligation (EO) equivalent to 6
times of duties, taxes and cess saved on capital goods, to be fulfilled in 6 years reckoned
from date of issue of Authorization.
 For manufacturing units located in Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh, specific Export
Obligation (EO) shall be 25% of the EO, as stipulated in above point. There shall be no
change in average EO imposed.
 In case of export of goods relating to the following, the EPCG Authorisation holder
shall not be required to maintain average export obligation.
(i) Handicrafts, (ii) Handlooms, (iii) Industries covered under Khadi and Village Industries
Commission (KVIC) (iv) Agriculture (v) Aquaculture (including Fisheries),Pisciculture, (vi)
Animal husbandry and Dairying, (vii) Floriculture & Horticulture, (viii) Poultry, (ix)
Viticulture, (x) Sericulture, (xi) Carpets, (xii) Coir, and (xiii) Jute.
 Authorisation shall be valid for import for 24 months from the date of issue of
Authorisation. Revalidation of EPCG Authorisation shall not be permitted.
 Import/procurement under EPCG scheme shall also be subjected to Average Export
Obligation (AEO).
 With a view to accelerating exports, in cases where authorization holder has fulfilled
75% or more of specific export obligation and 100% of Average Export Obligation till date,
if any, in half or less than half the original export obligation period specified, remaining
export obligation shall be condoned, and the authorization redeemed by RA concerned.
 EPCG scheme covers manufacturer exporters with or without supporting
manufacturer(s), merchant exporters tied to supporting manufacturer(s) and service
providers.

-- 13 of 26 --

14
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
 A company holding EPCG authorizations and having been admitted under the provisions
of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 2016 for commencement of insolvency proceedings
and in respect of whom the resolution plan has been approved under Section 31 of IBC
2016 by Adjudicating Authority may be permitted to relief, concessions and waivers in
accordance with the resolution plan approved/ finalised by Adjudicating
Authority/Appellate Authorities as the case may be.
 A person holding an EPCG Authorization may source capital goods from a domestic
manufacturer either through Invalidation Letter or through Advance Release Order.
 In case of direct imports, EO shall be reckoned with reference to actual duty /Taxes/Cess
saved amount. In case of domestic sourcing, EO shall be reckoned with reference to
notional Customs duty /Taxes/Cess saved on FOR value as indicated in ARO /
Invalidation letter.
CHAPTER 06 - EXPORT ORIENTED UNITS
(EOUs), ELECTRONICS HARDWARE
TECHNOLOGY PARKS (EHTPs), SOFTWARE
TECHNOLOGY PARKS (STPs) AND BIO
TECHNOLOGY PARKS (BTPs)
 Units undertaking to export their entire production of goods and services (except
permissible sales in DTA), may be set up under the Export Oriented Unit (EOU) Scheme,
Electronics Hardware Technology Park (EHTP) Scheme, Software Technology
Park(STP) Scheme or Bio-Technology Park (BTP) Scheme for manufacture of goods,
including repair, re-making, reconditioning, re- engineering, rendering of services,
development of software, agriculture including agro-processing, aquaculture, animal
husbandry, bio-technology, floriculture, horticulture, pisciculture, viticulture, poultry and
sericulture. Trading units are not covered under these schemes.
 The objectives of these schemes are to promote exports, enhance foreign exchange
earnings, and attract investment for export production and employment generation.

-- 14 of 26 --

15
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
 An EOU / EHTP / STP / BTP unit may export all kinds of goods and services except
items that are prohibited in ITC (HS) however export of gold jewelry, including partly
processed jewelry, whether plain or studded, and articles, containing gold of 8 carats and
above up to a maximum limit of 22 carats only shall be permitted.
 Procurement and supply of export promotion material like brochure/literature,
pamphlets, hoardings, catalogues, posters etc. upto a maximum value limit of 1.5% of
FOB (Free on Board) value of previous year’s exports shall also be allowed.
 Procurement and export of spares / components, upto 5% of FOB value of exports, may be
allowed to same consignee / buyer of the export article, subject to the condition that it
shall not count for NFE and direct tax benefits.
 Application for setting up an EOU shall be considered by Unit Approval Committee (UAC)/
Board of Approval (BoA) as the case may be, as detailed in the Handbook of Procedure.
 Second-hand capital goods, without any age limit, may also be imported with or without
payment of duty/ taxes.
 EOU/EHTP/STP/BTP unit shall be a positive net foreign exchange earner.
 Only projects having a minimum investment of Rs.1 Crore in plant & machinery shall
be considered for establishment as EOUs(Export Oriented Unit). However, this shall not
apply to existing units, units in EHTP / STP/ BTP, and EOUs in Handicrafts/Agriculture/
Floriculture/Aquaculture/Animal Husbandry/Information Technology, Services, Brass
Hardware, and Handmade jewelry sectors.
 Transfer of manufactured goods from one EOU/ EHTP/STP/BTP unit to another EOU /
EHTP/ STP/ BTP unit is allowed on payment of applicable GST and compensation cess
with prior intimation to concerned Development Commissioners of the transferor and
transferee units as well as concerned Customs authorities.
 EOUs shall be set up with approval of UAC to carry out reconditioning, repair, remaking,
testing, calibration, quality improvement, upgradation of technology and re-engineering
activities for export in foreign currency.
 For services, including software units, sale in DTA in any mode, including online data
communication, shall also be permissible up to 50% of FOB value of exports and /or 50%
of foreign exchange earned, where payment of such services is received in foreign
exchange.

-- 15 of 26 --

16
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
 Gems and jewelry units may sell up to 10% of FOB value of exports of the preceding year in
DTA (Domestic Tariff Area), subject to fulfillment of positive NFE (Net Foreign
Exchange).
 Unit will not be required to furnish bank guarantee at the time of import or going for job
work in DTA, where:
i. the unit has turnover of Rs. 5 crore or above; and
ii. the unit is in existence for at least three years; and
iii. the unit has achieved positive NFE / export obligation wherever applicable; and
has not been issued a show cause notice or a confirmed demand, during the
preceding 3 years.
 100% FDI investment permitted through automatic route similar to SEZ units.
 Applications for conversion into an EOU / EHTP / STP / BTP unit from existing DTA
units, having an investment of Rs. 50 crores and above in plant and machinery or exporting
Rs. 50 crores and above annually, shall be placed before BOA (Board of Approval) for a
decision.
 An authorized person of Gems & Jewellery EOU may also import gold in primary form,
upto 10 Kgs in a financial year through personal carriage, as per guidelines prescribed by
RBI and DoR.
CHAPTER 07 - DEEMED EXPORTS
 “Deemed Exports” for the purpose of this FTP refer to those transactions in which
goods supplied do not leave country, and payment for such supplies is received either
in Indian rupees or in free foreign exchange.
 “Deemed Exports” for the purpose of GST would include only the supplies notified under
Section 147 of the CGST/SGST Act, on the recommendations of the GST Council.
 The objective is to provide a level-playing field to domestic manufacturers and to
promote Make in India, in certain specified cases, as may be decided by the Government
from time to time.
 Incomplete/deficient application is liable to be rejected. However, simple interest @ 6%
per annum will be payable on delay in refund of duty drawback and terminal excise duty

-- 16 of 26 --

17
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
under the scheme, provided the claim is not settled within 30 days from the date of issue of
final Approval Letter by RA.
 Deemed exports shall be eligible for any / all following benefits in respect of
manufacture and supply of goods, qualifying as deemed exports, subject to terms and
conditions as:
 Advance Authorisation / Advance Authorisation for annual requirement / DFIA.
 Deemed Export Drawback.
 Refund of terminal excise duty for excisable goods mentioned in Schedule 4 of
Central Excise Act, 1944 provided the supply is eligible under that category of
deemed exports and there is no exemption.
CHAPTER 08 - QUALITY COMPLAINTS AND
TRADE DISPUTES
 Exporters need to project a good image of the country abroad to promote exports.
Maintaining an enduring relationship with foreign buyers is of utmost importance, and
complaints or trade disputes, whenever they arise, need to be settled amicably as soon as
possible.
 Complaints/Disputes between two or more Indian entities are not covered under this
mechanism. Similarly, complaints/disputes between two or more foreign entities are also
not covered.
 Action against erring exporters/importers can be taken under the Foreign Trade
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1992, as amended and under Foreign Trade
(Regulation) Rules, 1993, as amended.
 The following type of complaints may be considered:
(a) Complaints received from foreign buyers in respect of quality of goods or services,
or technology supplied by exporters from India;
(b) Complaints of importers against foreign suppliers in respect of quality of the
goods or services or technology supplied; and

-- 17 of 26 --

18
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
(c) Complaints of unethical commercial dealings categorized mainly as non supply/
partial supply of goods or services or technology after confirmation of order;
supplying goods or services or technology other than the ones as agreed upon; non-
payment; nonadherence to delivery schedules, etc.
 To deal effectively with the increasing number of complaints and disputes, a ‘Committee on
Quality Complaints and Trade Disputes’ (CQCTD) will be constituted in the Regional
Authorities (RAs) of DGFT.
 The Committee (CQCTD) will be responsible for enquiring and investigating into all
Quality related complaints and other trade-related complaints falling under the
jurisdiction of the respective RAs.
 The Committee at RA level can authorize B or any technical authority to assess whether
there has been any technical failure of not meeting the standards, manufacturing/ design
defects, etc. for which complaints have been received.
 Director General of Foreign Trade would appoint an officer, not below the rank of Joint
Director General, in the Headquarters, to function as the ‘Nodal Officer’ for monitoring the
trade disputes and coordinating with Regional Authorities of DGFT, Foreign Trade
Divisions of Department of Commerce, Indian Missions and other agencies.
 A Case Officer will be assigned for monitoring purposes in the designated Regional
Authorities for resolving complaints and trade disputes in a time bound manner.
 Complaints against foreign entities would be taken up for settlement by the respective
‘Foreign Trade Division’ in the Department of Commerce, Vanijya Bhavan, New Delhi
through Indian Missions abroad. Indian Missions Abroad will take up the complaints
against the foreign entities with authorities concerned.
CHAPTER 09 - PROMOTING CROSS BORDER
TRADE IN DIGITAL ECONOMY

-- 18 of 26 --

19
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
 The objective of this chapter is to provide a framework for cross-border trade of goods
and services from India in the digital economy and the promotion of e Commerce and other
emerging channels of exports from India.
 Export of goods or services where selling is through the internet on an e Commerce
platform, the payment for which shall be done through international credit or debit
cards, or other authorised electronic payment channels and as specified by the RBI from
time to time.
 Exports through a registered courier service/Foreign Post Office is permitted. The
value limit for exports through courier service shall be Rs. 10,00,000 per consignment.
 The Niryat Bandhu Scheme (NBS) as defined under Chapter 1 of the Policy shall have a
component for the promotion of e-Commerce and other emerging channels of exports.
Under the given NBS component, DGFT shall organise outreach activities/workshops in
partnership with Customs Authorities, Department of Post, ‘Industry Partners’ and
‘Knowledge Partners’ for promotion of e-Commerce exports. Besides outreach/ workshops,
specific focus may be on creation of electronic content as well.
 The objective is to establish designated areas as E-Commerce Export Hubs (hereafter
called “ECEH”), which would act as a centre for favourable business infrastructure and
facilities for Cross Border E-Commerce activities.
 The ECEH shall ordinarily be setup through private initiative. It may also be setup in
Public-PrivatePartnership (PPP) mode in partnership with the State governments/Central
government.
 ECEH will function to achieve agglomeration benefits for e-commerce exporters. The
ECEH may provide for storage (including cold storage facilities), packaging, labelling,
certification & testing and other common facilities for the purposes of export.
 Dak Ghar Niryat Kendras shall be operationalized throughout the country to work in a
hub-and-spoke model with Foreign Post Offices (FPOs) to facilitate cross-border e-
Commerce and to enable artisans, weavers, craftsmen, MSMEs in the hinterland and
land-locked regions to reach international markets.

-- 19 of 26 --

20
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
CHAPTER 10 - SCOMET: SPECIAL
CHEMICALS, ORGANISMS, MATERIALS,
EQUIPMENT AND TECHNOLOGIES
 The general provisions governing the export of dual use items, munitions and nuclear
related items, including software and technology viz. SCOMET, are dealt with in this
Chapter.
 Export of dual-use items, including software and technologies, having potential civilian /
industrial applications as well as use in weapons of mass destruction is regulated. It is
either prohibited or is permitted under an Authorization unless specifically exempted.
 SCOMET is an acronym for Special Chemicals, Organisms, Materials, Equipment and
Technologies. Accordingly, the SCOMET list is our National Export Control List of dual
use items munitions and nuclear related items, including software and technology and is
aligned to the control lists of the all the multilateral export control regimes and conventions.
 The SCOMET List is divided into nine categories of items from Category 0 to Category 8:

-- 20 of 26 --

21
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
 Export of items not in the SCOMET List may also be regulated under provisions of the
Weapons of Mass Destruction and their Delivery Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful
Activities) Act, 2005.
 Export authorisation is not required for supply of SCOMET items from DTA(domestic
tariff area) to SEZ /EoU. However, all supplies of SCOMET items from DTA to SEZ/EOU
will be reported to the Development Commissioner (DC) of the respective SEZ/EoU by
the supplier in the prescribed performa within one week of the supplies getting effected.
 Imported goods covered under the SCOMET list are not permitted for export, even from
the Customs bonded ware house, without an export authorization, unless specifically
exempted.

-- 21 of 26 --

22
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
 Export authorization for SCOMET items will be issued centrally by the DGFT (HQrs).
 DGFT in association with Administrative Ministries/ Departments and Trade
Associations will organize Industry Outreach Programmes on regular basis for effective
awareness among the exporters/importers dealing with trade and manufacture, in
particular, of SCOMET items.
FTP 2023: Ease of Doing Business
1. Digitization of Applications pertaining to FTP: Export promotion schemes processes for
managing the lifecycle of AA/EPCG/DFIA/Import/Export Licensing made completely
paperless and online
2. Automatic System-Based Approval of FTP Applications - DGFT implemented rule-based
automatic approval systems using Business Analytics Tools. It has been been- on - basis
for Advance Authorization Extension/Revalidation Applications.
3. Application fee reduced for Advance Authorization and EPCG Schemes for MSMEs (55-60%
of beneficiaries under the schemes).

-- 22 of 26 --

23
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
4. Process Re-engineering undertaken for streamlining as well automating processes. E.g.
Standardization of Composition Fees for extension of AA. Benefit for an authorisation with
CIF value of Rs 10 crores, with around 50% EO completion is illustrated as under
FTP 2023: Recognition to
Exporters
FTP 2023: Export promotion initiatives
Export performance threshold for Recognition to Exporters through Status Holders rationalized.
Enabling more beneficiaries to achieve higher recognition and brand image
 Four new Towns of Export Excellence
(TEE) are being declared in addition to
the already Existing 39 towns of export
excellence.
 To give thrust to cluster based economic
development

-- 23 of 26 --

24
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
Towns of Export Excellence- Benefits
 Recognition - global recognition and
brand credibility
 Market Access Initiative Scheme -
financial assistance for marketing, visit
to trade fairs/exhibitions, capacity
building and technological services
 Common Service Provider facility -
CSP facility under EPCG scheme helps
in increasing competitiveness of entire
cluster by enabling common use of
capital goods for exports
Internationalization of Trade in Rupees
International Trade Settlement in INR allowed and changes introduced in the FTP for grant
of export benefits & fulfillment of Export Obligation for export realizations in INR as per RBI.
Merchanting Trade Reform
1. Provisions for merchanting trade introduced under FTP
2. To boost merchanting activities from India - where goods do not touch Indian border.
The merchant buys from one country and supplies to another country while based in
India
3. Expected to facilitate merchanting trade from India making India a trade hub

-- 24 of 26 --

25
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
FTP 2023: Facilitating E-Commerce exports
FTP 2023: Steps to boost manufacturing
1. Prime Minister Mega Integrated Textile Region and Apparel Parks (PM MITRA) scheme
has been added as an additional scheme eligible to claim benefits under CSP (Common
Service Provider) Scheme of Export Promotion capital Goods Scheme (EPCG).
2. Dairy sector to be exempted from maintaining Average Export Obligation - to support
dairy sector to upgrade the technology
3. Battery Electric Vehicles (BEV) of all types, Vertical Farming equipment, Wastewater
Treatment and Recycling, Rainwater harvesting system and Rainwater Filters, and Green
Hydrogen are added to Green Technology products - will now be eligible for reduced
Export Obligation requirement under EPCG Scheme
4. Special Advance Authorization Scheme extended for Apparel and Clothing sector to
facilitate prompt execution of export orders - Norms would be fixed within fixed time-
frame
5. Benefits of Self-Ratification Scheme for fixation of Input-Output Norms extended to 2
star and above status holders in addition to Authorised Economic Operators at
present.

-- 25 of 26 --

26
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Foreign Trade Policy -2023
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
Way Forward
1. Foreign Trade Policy to be dynamic and responsive to the emerging trade scenario
2. Consultative mechanism to resolve issues of trade and Industry
3. Working towards making Indian Rupee(₹) a global currency and allowing International
Trade settlement in INR
4. Wider Engagement with States and Districts to promote exports from the grassroots.
5. Focus on E-commerce exports to streamline processes and make it easier for exports to
grow in E-Commerce space
6. Sector specific targets to achieve the goal of 1 trillion dollar merchandise exports and 1
trillion dollar services exports by 2030
7. Restructuring of Department of Commerce to make it future ready.

-- 26 of 26 --

