1
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
LABOR POLICY
LABOR POLICY
1.
• As labor is in the concurrent list, there was an entire gamut of 200+ state and 40+ central
laws with often colluding jurisdictions.
• The multiplicity, rigidity, and overlapping nature of laws also makes compliance
difficult which leads to inspector raj like conditions even now. This leads to corruption,
exploitation of workers, etc.
• The above situation also hampers the ease of doing business in India.
• India has a huge informal sector, with almost 90% workforce engaged in it. The labor laws
largely ignore the sector.
• The companies have an incentive in keeping their firm small as larger firms attract
stricter regulations.
• The contract employment always generates aversion from labors. There is a need to
introduce fixed-term employment.
• The female labor force participation is very low and it is mainly engaged in the informal
sector and low-paid jobs.
• The collective bargaining of the employees is weak. It needs to be strengthened.
• The codification of labor laws was recommended by the 2nd National commission on labor
(2002).
The Labor Code is the Central Government's initiative to tackle following existing lacunae:
• Almost 90% of the current workers are not covered under any social security.
• Unorganized sector workers are largely excluded.
• Prevailing schemes have very limited outreach.
• Multiplicity of applicable laws, policies, schemes and governmental instrumentalities;
• Current thresholds for wage and number of workers employed for a labor law to become
applicable creates tenacious incentives for the employers to avoid joining the system which
results in exclusions and distortions in the labor market.
The Code finds its genesis in the Report of the Second National Commission on Labor
(2002) and many other subsequent studies and reports on social security policies
including UN SDGs of the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals Agenda along with expert
technical assistance from the International Labor Organization on the policy framework.
Needs for consolidation
Four new codes basic
Labor codes

-- 1 of 25 --

2
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
As per the recommendations of the 2nd National Commission on Labor, Ministry has taken steps
for codification of existing Central labor laws into 4 Codes by simplifying, amalgamating and
rationalizing the relevant provisions of the Central Labor laws.
In a historic decision, the Government of India has announced that the four Labour Codes - the
Code on Wages, 2019, the Industrial Relations Code, 2020, the Code on Social Security,
2020 and the Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions Code, 2020 are being
made effective from 21st November 2025, rationalizing 29 existing labour laws.
• To simplify, consolidate, and rationalize the provisions of four existing laws-
o The Payment of Wages Act, 1936
o The Minimum Wages Act, 1948
o The Payment of Bonus Act, 1965
o The Equal Remuneration Act, 1976
• It aims to strengthen workers’ rights while promoting simplicity and uniformity in wage-
related compliance for employers.
• The Code on Wages, 2019 has reduced the number of rules from 163 to 58, number of
forms from 20 to 6 and number of registers from 24 to 2.
MAJOR HIGHLIGHTS
ENSURING FAIR AND MINIMUM WAGES
☛ Universal Minimum Wages:
• Section 5 of the Code on Wages, 2019 establishes a statutory right to minimum
wages for all employees, extending its coverage to every sector, both organised and
unorganised.
• Earlier, the Minimum Wages Act applied only to scheduled employments covering ~30% of
workers.
☛ Introduction of Floor Wage:
• Section 9 read with Rule 11 of the Code introduces floor wages as a statutory provision.
• A statutory floor wage shall be set by the Government based on minimum living standards,
with scope for regional variation.
• No state can fix minimum wages below this level, ensuring uniformity and adequacy
nationwide.
☛ Criteria for Wage Fixation:
The Code on Wages 2019

-- 2 of 25 --

3
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
• Minimum wage rates for timework, piece work for different wage period i.e. by hours, day or
by month to be fixed by the appropriate Government.
• Appropriate Governments will determine minimum wages considering workers’ skill levels
(unskilled, skilled, semi-skilled and highly skilled), geographic areas, and job conditions
such as temperature, humidity, or hazardous environments.
• The government shall revise minimum rate of wages ordinarily at an interval not
exceeding five years.
☛ Stating working hours
• Section 13 read with Rule 6 of the Code limits normal working hours to prevent employees
from being overworked without adequate compensation.
• The period of work shall not exceed 48 hours a week, if employee is working for less than 6
days a week.
• The period of work shall not exceed 12 hours in a day in cases where flexibility is provided.
This includes intervals for rest.
• The remaining days of that week shall be a paid holiday for the employee.
SECURING FAIR AND CONSISTENT WAGE PAYMENTS
☛ Ensuring payment of wages
• Under Section 43 of the Code, every employer shall pay wages to the employee employed by
him.
• In cases of failure, the company or firm or association or any other person who is the
proprietor of the establishment, in which the employee is employed, shall be responsible for
such unpaid wages, reinforcing employer liability under the Code.
☛ Universal Coverage for Wage Payment:
• Provisions ensuring timely payment and preventing un-authorized deductions will
apply to all employees, irrespective of wage limits (currently applicable only to employees
earning up to ₹24,000/month).
• It protects both blue-collar and white-collar employee, bringing them under a uniform
wage protection framework.
☛ Timely Limit for payment of wages
• In accordance with Section 17 of the Code on Wages, 2019, the employer shall pay or
cause to be paid wages to all the employees, engaged on

-- 3 of 25 --

4
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
o Daily; then at shift end,
o Weekly; before the weekly holiday,
o Fortnightly; within two days, and
o Monthly; within seven days of the next month.
o On termination or resignation; wages must be paid within two working days.
☛ Proof of Payment and Employment
• Under Section 50(3) read with Rule 34 of the Code on Wages, 2019 the employers shall
provide wage slips, electronically or in physical form, on or before wage payment,
ensuring transparency and reducing disputes.
☛ Payment of Annual Bonus
• Payment of bonus is applicable to every employee, drawing wages not exceeding such
amount as fixed by appropriate government, who has worked for at least 30 days in an
accounting year.
• The annual bonus is paid minimum at the rate of eight and one-third % and maximum up
to 20% of the wages earned by the employee.
• This promotes economic justice by profit sharing, boosts employee morale, loyalty and
motivation.
☛ Extension of Limitation Period
• The Code on Wages, 2019 provides that period of limitation for filing of claims by an
employee from the earlier duration of 6 months-2 years has been enhanced to a period of 3
years.
• This gives employees more time to gather evidence, seek support, and pursue justice
effectively.
☛ Minimum Time Rate Wages for Piece Work
• Under Section 12 of the Code of Wages, 2019, if an employee is employed on piece work
where a minimum time rate (instead of a piece rate) is fixed, the employer must pay wages
not less than this minimum time rate.
☛ Overtime Compensation:
• In accordance with Section 14 of Code on Wages, 2019 employers must pay overtime
wages at a rate not less than twice the normal wages for any work performed beyond regular
working hours.
o Ensuring Payment of Wages: Benefits the Employees

-- 4 of 25 --

5
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
▪ Section 43 holds the employer directly accountable for payment of wages
▪ Section 17 guarantees timely income, prevents financial distress, and
ensures employee can meet essential needs.
▪ Section 50(3) read with Rule 34 ensures proof of employment and
payment that promotes transparency, prevents disputes, and empowers
employees.
▪ Section 12 prevents wage manipulation, exploitation and unfair
practices in piece-rate jobs
DECRIMINALIZATION AND COMPOSITION OF OFFENCES
☛ Composition of Offences
• Section 56 read with Rule 36 of the code replaces criminal penalties (like imprisonment)
with civil penalties (like graded monetary fines) for first time offences punishable with fine
only.
• It introduces a provision of compounding for offenses punishable (with fine only) by paying
sum of fifty percent of the maximum fine.
• For employers, it ensures that wage laws benefit the employees directly.
• For employees, it creates a work environment that is not driven by fear.
☛ Compounding of Offences:
• First-time, non-imprisonable offences can be compounded by paying a penalty. Repeat
offences within five years, however, cannot be compounded.
☛ Inspector-cum-Facilitator:
• The traditional role of “Inspector” is replaced with “Inspector-cum-Facilitator,” emphasizing
guidance, awareness, and advisory roles alongside enforcement to improve compliance.
GENDER INCLUSIVE EMPLOYMENT POLICIES
☛ Gender Equality in Employment:
• Pursuant to Section 3 of Code on Wages, 2019, there shall be no discrimination on the basis
of gender, including transgender identity, in matters of recruitment, wages, or employment
conditions for the same or similar work performed by employees.
• Unfair wage disparities based on gender shall be removed and equal pay for equal work will
be ensured.

-- 5 of 25 --

6
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
• The Code has been drafted after amalgamation, simplification and rationalization of the
relevant provisions of the 13 Central Labour Acts-
1. The Factories Act, 1948;
2. The Plantations Labour Act, 1951;
3. The Mines Act, 1952;
4. The Working Journalists and other Newspaper Employees (Conditions of Service
and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1955;
5. The Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates of Wages) Act, 1958;
6. The Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961;
7. The Beedi and Cigar Workers (Conditions of Employment) Act, 1966;
8. The Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970;
9. The Sales Promotion Employees (Conditions of Service) Act, 1976;
10. The Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of
Service) Act, 1979;
11. The Cine-Workers and Cinema Theatre Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act,
1981;
12. The Dock Workers (Safety, Health and Welfare) Act, 1986 and;
13. The Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and
Conditions of Service) Act, 1996.
• The Code balances the twin objectives of safeguarding worker rights and safe working
conditions, and creating a business-friendly regulatory environment.
Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions Code Bill, 2020

-- 6 of 25 --

7
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
MAJOR HIGHLIGHTS
WORKER WELFARE & EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS
☛ Formalisation through Appointment Letters
• Every employee will be given appointment letters in the prescribed format specifying
the details of the employee, designation, category, details of the wages, details of
social security etc.
☛ Annual Leave with wages
• The workers employed in an establishment are entitled for paid leave in a calendar year
on working of 180 days or more in such calendar year.
o Earlier workers had to work for 240 days for becoming eligible for paid leave.
☛ Inter-State Migrant Workermen (ISMW)
• The definition has been widened to include those employed directly or through contractor
and also covers workers who migrate on their own
• Pro-Worker Provisions
o ISMW will receive to journey allowance from the employer to visit native place once in
12 months.
o Migrant construction workers will get portability of benefits under Building & Other
Construction Workers (BOCW)Cess fund and PDS ration.
☛ National Worker Database
• The Ministry of Labour & Employment has also taken steps to develop a national database
to enroll unorganized workers including migrants.
☛ Victim Compensation:
• Courts can direct at least 50% of fines imposed on offenders to be paid as compensation
to victims or their legal heirs in case of injury or death.
• The definition of audio- visual worker has been revised and now it includes digital/audio-
visual workers and dubbing artist, stunt persons these persons will also get the benefit
of law.
o Now Code gives dubbing artists and stunt workers formal recognition and access
to legal protections, ensuring safer and fairer working conditions.
HEALTH, SAFETY & WELL-BEING

-- 7 of 25 --

8
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
☛ Safety Committees
• Every factory employing 500 or more workers, employer employing 250 or more BOCW
(Building and Other Construction Workers) and employer employing 100 or more mine
workers will constitute safety committee which will consist of representatives from
employers and workers.
☛ Universal coverage of establishments for health, safety and welfare of workers
• This code has provided health, safety and welfare of workers in all sectors which was
previously limited to 7 sectors viz. factories, mines, plantation, beedi-cigar, dock workers,
BOCW and motor transport.
☛ Health and Medical Coverage
• Every employee will be eligible for free annual health check-ups. Also, the plantation
employer can now avail the ESI facility for medical services.
☛ National Standards and National Board
• In place of 6 boards under different acts, now there is a single National Occupational
Safety and Health Advisory Board which is of tripartite nature and has representation
from trade unions, employer associations, and State Governments to advise Central
Govt. on standards, regulations etc. for factory, mine, dockwork, bidi & cigar, building
or other construction work etc.
• The boards will set national standards for occupational safety, health and working
conditions that will be mandatory for states to follow ensuring compliance to stringent
quality standards for occupational safety, health and working conditions across the country
for all workers.
☛ Social Security Fund
• The Code provides for establishment of a Social Security fund for the welfare of the
unorganised workers to which amount received from composition of the offence as well as
from the penalty, would be credited.
INDUSTRY FACILITATION & EASE OF DOING BUSINESS
☛ Extended Applicability
• An enabling provision has been made that the Government can extend applicability of this
Code to any establishment, even if it has one employee, carrying out hazardous or life-
threatening occupations.

-- 8 of 25 --

9
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
☛ Ease of Doing Business
• Electronic Single registration, Single return, Single all India licences valid for 5 years and
deemed approvals promotes “Ease of Doing Business”.
☛ Electronic Registration
• Uniform threshold of 10 employees; one registration for an establishment has been
envisaged in place of 6 registrations - creating a centralized database and promote ease of
doing business.
☛ Revised Factory Thresholds
• The threshold to obtain license for factory has been increased from 10 to 20 with power and
20 to 40 without power.
• Further, the provision to grant permission for construction of factory or expansion of factory
a time limit of 30 days has been prescribed with the provision of deemed permission.
• A time limit of 30 days has been fixed for the site appraisal committee to give its
recommendations for initial location of the factory involving hazardous process or expansion
of such factories.
☛ Inspector-cum-Facilitator System:
• Inspectors will now act as facilitators with an objective to help employers comply with law,
rules and regulations rather than merely policing them.
☛ Third party audit and certification
• Provision has been made for third party audit and certification of start-up establishments or
class of establishments.
• It will help establishments to assess and improve health & safety without intervention of
Inspector-cum-Facilitator.
• It will reduce the “inspector raj” and at same time will improve health & safety in
establishments.
☛ Digitization of Records
• There is drastic reduction in number of registers from 84 to 8 under this Code.
REVISED CONTRACT LABOUR REGIME
☛ Defined Core and Non-Core Activities

-- 9 of 25 --

10
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
• In OSH Code the core & non-core activities are clearly defined & employers are given
flexibility to employ contract labour even in the core activities, if-
o (a) the normal functioning of the establishment is such that the activity is
ordinarily done through contractor; or
o (b) the a ctivities are such that they do not require full time workers for the major
portion of the working hours in a day or for longer periods, as the case may be;
o (c) any sudden increase of volume of work in the core activity which needs tobe
accomplished in a specified time.
• With clear distinction of core and non-core activity, workers will have clarity of the type of
work engaged in and thus, flexibility to choose work.
☛ Threshold for Applicability
• Threshold for applicability of the provisions relating to contract labour has been increased
from 20 to 50 workers as a result the contractor employing less than 50 contract labour
will not require license.
☛ Contract Labour Welfare & Wages
• The Code casts responsibility on the principal employer to provide welfare facilities like
health and safety measures to contract workers.
• If the contractor fails to pay wages, the principal employer has to pay unpaid wages to the
contract labour.
COMPOUNDING & DECRIMINALIZATION OF OFFENCES
☛ Compounding of Offences
• The first-time offences which are punishable with fine only shall be compoundable by
paying sum of 50% of the maximum fine and the punishment with fine or imprisonment or
with both shall be also be compoundable by paying sum of 75% of the maximum fine
making the law less punitive and more compliance-oriented.
☛ De-criminalization of offences & Improvement Notice
• Several offences have been decriminalized making the law less punitive and more
compliance-oriented encouraging voluntary compliance and reducing fear of harsh
penalties for procedural lapses.
• Replacing criminal penalties (like imprisonment) with civil penalties (like monetary
fines) for certain offences.

-- 10 of 25 --

11
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
• The employer will be given mandatory 30 days notice for compliance before taking any
legal action.
WOMEN-CENTRIC PROVISIONS
☛ Women’s Employment:
• Women can work in all types of establishments and during night hours (before 6AM, beyond
7PM) with consent and safety measures, fostering equality and inclusion.
☛ Crèches facilities
• Establishment having more than 50 workers have to provide creche facility either separately
or common crèche facilities at suitable locations.
• It supports working women with children below the age of 6 years.
THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY,2020
• The Code on Social Security incorporates existing nine Social Security Acts viz;
o The Employee's Compensation Act, 1923;
o The Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948;
o The Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952;
o The Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959;
o The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961;
o The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972;
o The Cine-Workers Welfare Fund Act, 1981;
o The Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Cess Act, 1996;
o The Unorganised Workers' Social Security Act, 2008
• The Code extends social security to all workers- including unorganized, gig, and platform
workers-covering life, health, maternity, and provident fund benefits, while introducing
digital systems and facilitator-based compliance for greater efficiency.

-- 11 of 25 --

12
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
MAJOR HIGHLIGHTS
PRO-WORKER PROVISIONS
☛ Expanded ESIC (Employees' State Insurance) Coverage:
• ESIC now applies pan-India, eliminating the criteria of “notified areas.”
• Establishments with fewer than 10 employees may voluntarily opt in with mutual consent of
employers and employees.
• For hazardous or life-threatening occupations, the minimum limit of 10 workers has been
removed. ESIC coverage is now mandatory even for a single worker engaged in such
work
☛ Gratuity for Fixed-Term Employees:
• Under Section 53 of the code, the Government has reduced the eligibility requirement for
gratuity for Fixed Term Employees (FTEs) from five years to one year.
• In case where the employee completes one year of continuous service, gratuity shall be
applicable on proportionate basis.
☛ Inclusion of Gig and Platform Workers:
• For the first time in the country, social security benefits have been extended to
unorganised, gig and platform workers under Sections 113 & 114 of the Code on
Social Security, 2020.
• New definitions are included- “aggregator,” “gig worker,” and “platform worker” to enable
social security coverage.
• Aggregators to contribute 1- 2% of annual turnover (capped at 5% of payments to such
workers).
• The Code covers following measures to extend welfare benefits to a large domain of workers:
o Establishment of a National Social Security Board to advise the Government
for formulating and monitoring suitable schemes for different sections of workers
in the unorganised, gig and platform sectors.
o Provision for State Unorganised workers Social Security Board that will advise
the state governments about suitable schemes for unorganised workers, gig and
platform workers, covered under Section 6(9).
o Creation of a Social Security Fund based on contributions from the Central &
State Governments, collected from Corporate Social Responsibility, fines collected

-- 12 of 25 --

13
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
due to compounding etc. This fund will be used to provide benefits such as life
insurance, disability cover, health and maternity benefits, and provident
fund schemes for these workers.
o Section 13 has also been envisaged for entrustment of additional functions to
social security organisations, for future requirements.
☛ Universal Coverage under EPFO:
• The Employees Provident Fund & Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, valid for the
establishments mentioned in Schedule 1 of the Act, has been removed under the code.
• Now, the Code on Social Security, 2020 extends the coverage of the Employees’ Provident
Fund (EPF) with the provisions applying to all establishments that have 20 or more
employees, regardless of the type of industry.
☛ National Registration & Unique Identification
• The Government will build a National Database of Unorganized Workers to make it easier
to design and deliver social security benefits for specific worker groups.
• All unorganized, gig, and platform workers will have to register themselves on a National
Portal, post which each worker will receive a Unique Identification Number.
• Verified through Aadhaar, it will be valid across the entire country.
☛ Uniform Definition of Wages:
• “Wages” now include basic pay, dearness allowance, and retaining allowance; 50% of the
total remuneration (or such percentage as may be notified) shall be added back to compute
wages, ensuring consistency in calculating gratuity, pension, and social security benefits.
☛ Expanded Definition of Dependents:
• The definition of “family” to include the mother-in-law and father-in-law of a woman
employee (subject to an income cap).
• It also includes a minor unmarried brother or sister who is wholly dependent on the
insured person, if the parents are not alive.
☛ Commuting Accidents Covered:
• Accidents during travel between home and workplace are now deemed employment-related,
qualifying for compensation.

-- 13 of 25 --

14
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
PRO-WOMEN PROVISIONS
☛ Maternity Benefit Entitlement
• Every woman employee who has worked for at least 80 days in the 12 months before the
expected delivery is eligible for maternity benefit equal to her average daily wages during
the leave period.
• The maximum duration of maternity leave is 26 weeks, of which up to 8 weeks can be
taken before delivery.
• A woman who adopts a child below 3 months of age or a commissioning mother (a
biological mother who uses surrogacy) is entitled to 12 weeks of maternity benefit from
the date of adoption or when the child is handed over.
☛ Work from Home
• To provide more flexibility to women returning after maternity leave, the Code allows them
to work from home, if the nature of work permits.
• The employer may permit work from home based on mutual agreement between the
employer and the employee.
☛ Simplified Certification for proof of Delivery, etc.
• Proof of maternity-related conditions such as pregnancy, delivery, miscarriage, or related
illness has been simplified under the Code. Medical certificates can now be issued by:
o A registered medical practitioner
o An accredited social health activist (ASHA worker)
o A qualified auxiliary nurse, or
o A midwife
☛ Medical Bonus
• Under Section 64, if the employer does not provide free pre-natal and post-natal care,
the woman employee is entitled to a medical bonus of ₹3,500.
☛ Nursing Breaks
• After returning to work post-childbirth, a woman employee is entitled to two nursing
breaks each day for nursing her child until the child attains 15 months of age.
☛ Crèche Facility
• Every establishment with 50 or more employees must provide a crèche facility within
a prescribed distance.

-- 14 of 25 --

15
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
• This requirement is now gender-neutral and applies to all types of establishments.
• The employer must allow four visits a day by the woman to the crèche which includes
the rest intervals.
o Establishments can avail common crèche facility of the Central Government,
State Government, municipality or private entity or provided by non-
Governmental organisation or by any other organization or group of
establishments who may pool their resources for setting up of common crèche in
the manner as they may agree for such purpose.
o If a crèche facility is not provided, the employer must pay a crèche allowance
not less than ₹500 per month per child (for up to two children).
PRO – GROWTH PROVISION
☛ Digitalisation
• The Code provides for maintaining all records, registers, and returns in electronic form.
This will reduce compliance costs for employers and make processes simpler and more
efficient.
☛ Limitation on Inquiry
• A five-year limit has been introduced for starting any inquiry under the Employees’
Provident Fund to determine applicability or recover dues.
• Such inquiries must be completed within two years from the date they begin, with a
possible extension of one year if approved by the Central Provident Fund Commissioner
(CPFC).
☛ Reduced EPF Appeal Deposit:
• Employers appealing EPFO orders now need to deposit only 25% of the assessed amount
(down from 40–70%), reducing financial burden and ensuring ease of business and access
to justice.
☛ Self-assessment for Construction Cess:
• Employers can now self-assess cess liabilities in respect to Building and Other Construction
Work, previously assessed by the notified Government authority.
• It reduces procedural delays and official intervention.
☛ ESIC for Plantations

-- 15 of 25 --

16
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
• As per existing Act, plantation owners are not covered by ESIC Schemes. The Code now
gives them the option to join ESIC voluntarily.
☛ Decriminalization & Monetary Fines:
• The code has replaced imprisonment with monetary fines for certain offences.
• Further, the Code has replaced imprisonment with monetary fines for 13 offences, and
7 violations carrying imprisonment of less than one year can now be compounded into
penalties or fines.
PRO-EMPLOYMENT PROVISIONS
☛ Vacancy Reporting:
• Employers shall report vacancies to specified career centres before recruitment, promoting
transparency in employment opportunities.
☛ Fixed-Term Employment
• With the Code on Social Security 2020 in place, fixed-term employees are now eligible for
gratuity after completing one year of continuous service, a benefit that was earlier
available only to permanent employees.
☛ Universal Coverage of Workers
• The Code broadens social security and employment coverage to categories of workers who
were earlier outside the scope of such benefits.
• (a) Gig and Platform Workers:
o For the first time, these categories have been formally recognised. The Code
mandates the framing of social security schemes for them, covering life
insurance, disability insurance, health, maternity, and pension benefits. This
will help gig and platform workers live with dignity and security.
• (b) Unorganised Sector / Self-Employed Workers:
o The Code provides for social security schemes for self-employed and
unorganised workers, as well as other classes of persons, ensuring their welfare
and protection.
☛ Time-bound EPF (Employees’ Provident Fund) Inquiries:
• A five-year limit has been set for initiating EPF inquiries and recovery proceedings, to be
completed within two years (extendable by one).
• Suo-moto reopening of cases has been abolished, ensuring timely resolution.

-- 16 of 25 --

17
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
INDUSTRIAL RELATION CODE
• The Industrial Relations Code (IR Code) has been prepared after amalgamating, simplifying
and rationalizing the relevant provisions of -
o Trade Unions Act, 1926,
o Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946
o Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
MAJOR HIGHLIGHTS
UNIFORM DEFINITIONS TO SIMPLIFY COMPLIANCE
☛ Definitions of “Worker” has been expanded
• Pursuant to Section 2(zr) of Industrial Relations Code, 2020, the definition of ‘worker’ has
been expanded to include sales promotion employees, working journalists, and supervisory
employees earning up to ₹18,000 per month, thereby extending statutory labour protections
to a wider segment of the workforce.
☛ Expansion of the definition of “Industry”
• As per Section 2(p) of Industrial Relations Code, 2020, the term “industry” now
encompasses any systematic activity carried on by cooperation between employer and
worker, regardless of whether capital is invested or profit is intended, thereby bringing non-
profit and low-capital activities within its ambit.
☛ Statutory recognition to the Trade Unions
• A union with 51% membership in an establishment can be categorised as a Negotiating
Union with exclusive rights to represent workers in collective bargaining and grievance
redressal.
• In case this threshold is not met, Negotiating Council shall be constituted comprising
representatives of all trade unions with at least 20% membership.
☛ Fixed Term Employment (FTE):

-- 17 of 25 --

18
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
• Allows direct, time-bound contracts with full parity in wages and benefits; gratuity eligibility
after one year. The provision reduces excessive contractualization and offers cost efficiency
to employers.
☛ Amended Definition of “Strike”
• To discourage flash strike and to promote industrial harmony, the definition of strike has
been amended. It includes “mass casual leave also within the ambit”, which comprises of
cases where casual leave has been taken by more than fifty percent of the workers on a
given day.
☛ Notice for Strikes/Lockouts:
• Mandatory 14-day notice for all establishments to promote dialogue and minimize
disruptions
☛ Industrial Tribunals:
• Two-member tribunals consisting of judicial and administrative member for quicker dispute
resolution.
☛ Direct Tribunal Access:
• Parties may approach tribunals directly after failed conciliation within 90 days.
PROVISIONS ON RETRENCHMENT PROCESS
☛Re-skilling Fund:
• To train retrenched employees, this fund has been set up from the contribution to be made
by an industrial establishment for an amount equal to 15 days' wages for every worker
retrenched.
• This is in addition to retrenchment compensation. The amount will be credited to the
workers account within 45 days of retrenchment.
☛ Higher Threshold for Lay-off/Retrenchment/Closure:
• Approval limit raised from 100 to 300 workers; States may enhance the limit further. The
provision will simplify compliance and contribute to formalization.
ADVANCING GENDER EQUITY AT WORK
☛ Representation of women in the Grievance Redressal Committee
• The Code provides for adequate representation of women in the Grievance Redressal
Committee, not less than in proportion to their presence in the workforce in the industrial
establishment.

-- 18 of 25 --

19
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
• Thus, ensuring gender-sensitive dispute resolution and promoting equality and safety at the
workplace.
☛ Women’s Representation:
• Ensures proportional representation of women in grievance committees for gender-sensitive
redressal.
☛ Work-from-Home Provision:
• Permitted in service sectors by mutual consent, improving flexibility.
OTHER PRO-GROWTH PROVISION
☛ Threshold for Applicability of Standing Orders
• To reduce the compliance burden for the establishments, the provisions relating to the
requirement of certified standing orders shall apply only to industrial establishments
employing 300 or more workers (previously 100) on any day in the preceding 12 months.
☛ Digital Processes:
• Enables electronic record-keeping, registration, and communication for transparency and
efficiency.
• ‘Gig work’, ‘Platform work’, and ‘Aggregators’ have been defined for the first
time.
Youth Workers:
• Minimum wage is guaranteed for all workers.
• All workers to get appointment letters, - promoting social security, employment
history and formal employment.
• Worker exploitation by employers is prohibited—payment of wages during leave
has been made mandatory.
• To ensure a decent standard of living, workers will receive wages as per the floor
wage determined by the Central Government.
MSME Workers:
• All MSME workers covered under the Social Security Code, 2020, eligibility based
on employee count.
• Minimum wage guaranteed for all workers.

-- 19 of 25 --

20
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
• Workers will have access to facilities such as canteens, drinking water, and
rest areas.
• Provisions for standard working hours, double overtime wages, and paid
leave.
• Timely wage payment ensured.
Beedi & Cigar Workers:
• Minimum wages guaranteed for all.
• Working hours capped at 8 -12 hours per day, 48 hours per week has been
capped.
• Overtime Work beyond prescribed hours, to be consent based and pay at least
double the normal wage rate.
• Timely payment of wages ensured.
• Workers eligible for Bonus after completing 30 days of work in a year.
Plantation Workers:
• Plantation workers are now brought under the OSHWC Code and the Social
Security Code.
• Labour Codes apply to plantations with more than 10 workers or 5 or more
hectares.
• Mandatory safety training on handling, storing, and using chemicals.
• Protective equipment mandatory to prevent accidents and chemical exposure.
• Workers and their families to get full ESI medical facilities; Education
facilities for their children are also guaranteed.
Audio-Visual & Digital Media Workers:
• Digital and audio-visual workers, including journalists in electronic media,
dubbing artists, and stunt persons will now receive full benefits.
• Mandatory appointment letter for all workers - clearly stating their designation,
wages, and social security entitlements.
• Timely payment of wages ensured.
• Overtime Work beyond prescribed hours, to be consent based and pay at least
double the normal wage rate.
Mine Workers:
• The Social Security Code treats certain commuting accidents as employment-
related, subject to conditions of time, and place of employment.
• Central Government notified standards to standardize workplace occupational
safety and health conditions.

-- 20 of 25 --

21
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
• Health safety for all workers will be ensured. Free annual health check-up will
be provided.
• Limit on working hours set to 8 to 12 hours per day, 48 hours per week to ensure
health and work-life balance.
Hazardous Industry Workers:
• All workers will receive free annual health check-ups.
• Central Government will frame national standards for better safety of workers.
• Women can work in all establishments, including underground mining, heavy
machinery, and hazardous jobs, ensuring equal job opportunities for all.
• Mandatory safety committee at each site for on-site safety monitoring, and safe
handling of hazardous chemicals ensured.
Textile Workers:
• All Migrant Workers (direct, contractor-based and self-migrated) to get Equal
wages, welfare benefits and PDS portability benefits.
• Workers can raise claims for upto 3 years for settlement of pending dues,
facilitating flexible and easy resolution.
• Provision for double wages for workers for overtime work.
IT & ITES Workers:
• Release of Salary mandatory by the 7th of every month. Transparency and
trust ensured.
• Equal pay for equal work made mandatory, women’s participation is
strengthened.
• Facility for women to work night shifts in all establishments – women to
get opportunity to earn higher wages.
• Timely resolution of harassment, discrimination, and wage related disputes.
• Guarantee of social security benefits through fixed-term employment and
mandatory appointment letters.
Dock Workers:
• All Dock workers to get formal recognition, Legal Protection.
• Mandatory appointment letters to guarantee social security benefits.
• Provident fund, pension, and insurance benefits ensured for
all, whether contract or temporary dock workers.
• Employer-funded annual health check-ups mandatory.
• Dock workers to get mandatory medical facilities, first aid, sanitary and
washing areas, etc., to ensure decent work conditions and safety.

-- 21 of 25 --

22
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
Export Sector Workers:
• Export sector fixed term workers to receive gratuity, provident fund (PF), and
other social security benefits.
• Every worker to have the option of availing annual leaves after 180 days of work
in a year.
• Every worker to get right to timely wage payment and no unauthorized wage
deductions and no wage ceiling restrictions.
● Women allowed to work in night shifts with consent, ensuring
opportunity to earn higher income.
● Safety and welfare measures include mandatory written consent, double
wages for overtime, safe transportation, CCTV surveillance, and security
arrangements.
Employees’ State Insurance Scheme:
Employees’ State Insurance Scheme of India is a multi-dimensional Social Security
Scheme tailored to provide Socio-economic protection to the 'employees' in the organized
sector against the events of sickness, maternity, disablement and death due to
employment injury and to provide medical care to the insured employees and their
families.
Objective To provide protection to employees as defined in Employees' State
Insurance Act, 1948 against sickness, disablement, death due to
employment injury, maternity benefit, and to provide medical care to
insured persons and their families.
Administered
by
The ESI Scheme is administered by a statutory corporate body
called the Employees' State Insurance Corporation (ESIC), which
has members representing Employers, Employees, the Central
Government, State Government, Medical Profession and the
Hon’ble Members of Parliament. Director General is the Chief
Executive Officer of the Corporation and is also an ex-officio
member of the Corporation.
Funding The ESI scheme is a self-financing scheme. The ESI funds are
primarily built out of contribution from employers and employees
payable monthly at a fixed percentage of wages paid. The State
Governments also bear 1/8th share of the cost of Medical
Benefit.
Applicability The ESI Act, 1948, applies to organizations with 10 or more
employees, drawing a salary of up to ₹21,000.
(Rs. 25000 per month for persons with disability).

-- 22 of 25 --

23
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
Medical Benefit - Full medical care to the insured person and his family members
with no ceiling on expenditure of the treatment.
Sickness Benefit - In the form of cash compensation at the rate of 70 per cent of
wages.
Maternity Benefit - For confinement/pregnancy is payable for 26 weeks, which is
extendable by further one month on medical advice.
Disablement Benefit -
o Temporary disablement benefit (TDB): 90% of wage is payable so long as the
disability continues.
o Permanent disablement benefit (PDB): 90% of wage in the form of monthly
payments
Dependents Benefit - Paid in the form of monthly payment to the dependents in
cases where death is due to employment injury or occupational hazards.
Other Benefits
o Funeral Expenses
o Confinement Expenses
o Vocational Rehabilitation
o Physical Rehabilitation
o Old Age Medical Care.
• The Act is managed under the aegis of Employees’ Provident Fund
Organization (EPFO).
• The Act extends to the whole of India, including two Union Territories,
Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh. The Act is currently applicable:
Not applicable It is not applicable for seasonal factories, factories engaged in
the pursuit of blending, packing or repacking tea or coffee or any
other processes as notified by the Central Government.
Contribution • The rate of contribution is fixed at 4% of the wages with
employers’ share being 3.25% and employees’ share being
0.75%.
• The Government of India through Ministry of Labor and
Employment decides the rate of contribution under the ESI Act
THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ACT,
1952
Benefits

-- 23 of 25 --

24
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
o to every establishment, which is a factory engaged in any industry specified
in Schedule-I of the Act in which twenty or more persons are employed;
and
• In case of Cine-Workers, the required employee strength for the purpose of
coverage under the Act is five.
• However, the provisions of the 1952 Act do not apply to certain excluded
establishments, such as registered cooperative societies with less than 50
workers and working without the aid of power.
• the provisions of the 1952 Act do not apply to any other establishment belonging
to or under the control of the Central Government or a State Government whose
employees are entitled to the benefit of contributory provident fund or old age
pension.
➢ Universal account number or UAN: The UAN is a 12-digit number allotted to
each Employee Provident Fund member by the Employee Provident Fund
Organization (EPFO) which gives him control of his EPF account and minimizes
the role of employer.
The International Labor Organization (ILO):
• is a United Nations agency headquartered at Geneva, Switzerland dealing
with labor problems, particularly international labor standards, social protection,
and work opportunities for all. Total 187 members.
• It is devoted to promoting social justice and internationally recognized human and
labour rights, pursuing its founding mission that social justice is essential to
universal and lasting peace.
• The only tripartite U.N. agency, since 1919 the ILO brings together governments,
employers and workers of 187 Member States, to set labour standards, develop
policies and devise programmes promoting decent work for all women and men.
The International Labour Organization (ILO) has released its Employment and Social Trends
Report 2026.
• Unemployment Rate: Projected to stay flat at 4.9% (~186 million people).
• Global Jobs Gap: This is a broader measure than unemployment; it includes
everyone who wants work but cannot access it. It is projected to reach 408
million in 2026.
• Informal Employment: Over 2 billion workers worldwide remain in the informal
sector.
• Working Poverty: 284 million workers live in extreme poverty (earning <$3/day).

-- 24 of 25 --

25
(formerly CrackGradeB)
LABOR POLICY ESI 2026
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455

-- 25 of 25 --

