1
(formerly CrackGradeB)
MULTICULTURALISM
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
Multiculturalism
In sociology, multiculturalism describes the manner in which a given society
deals with cultural diversity. Based on the underlying assumption that members of
often very different cultures can coexist peacefully, multiculturalism expresses the view
that society is enriched by preserving, respecting, and even encouraging cultural
diversity.
In the area of political philosophy, multiculturalism refers to the ways in which
societies choose to formulate and implement official policies dealing with the
equitable treatment of different cultures.
Multiculturalism can take place on a nationwide scale or within a nation’s
communities. It may occur either naturally through immigration, or artificially
when jurisdictions of different cultures are combined through legislative decree, as
in the case of French and English Canada.
• Proponents of multiculturalism believe that people should retain at least some
features of their traditional cultures.
• Opponents say that multiculturalism threatens the social order by
diminishing the identity and influence of the predominant culture.
MULTICULTURALISM THEORIES:
The two primary theories or models of multiculturalism as the manner in which
different cultures are integrated into a single society are best defined by the metaphors
commonly used to describe them—the
“melting pot” and the “salad bowl”
theories.
The Melting Pot Theory:
The melting pot theory of
multiculturalism assumes that various
immigrant groups will tend to “melt
together,” abandoning their individual
cultures and eventually becoming fully assimilated into the predominant society.
Typically used to describe the assimilation of immigrants into the United States,
the melting pot theory is often illustrated by the metaphor of a foundry’s smelting pots
in which the elements iron and carbon are melted together to create a single, stronger
metal—steel.
In 1782, French-American immigrant J. Hector St. John de Crevecoeur wrote that in
America, “individuals of all nations are melted into a new race of men, whose labors
and posterity will one day cause great changes in the world.”

-- 1 of 4 --

2
(formerly CrackGradeB)
MULTICULTURALISM
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
Also, India's numerous festivals showcase this melting pot effect. Diwali, the
festival of lights, is widely celebrated across religions, becoming a symbol of national
unity. Regional festivals like Onam in Kerala or Bihu in Assam add their unique flavors,
enriching the national tapestry.
The melting pot model has been criticized for reducing diversity, causing people to
lose their traditions, and for having to be enforced through governmental policy.
For example, the U.S. Indian Reorganization Act of 1934 forced the assimilation of
nearly 350,000 Indigenous peoples into American society without any regard for
the diversity of their heritages and lifestyles.
The Salad Bowl Theory:
A more liberal theory of multiculturalism than the melting pot, the salad bowl theory
describes a heterogeneous society in which people coexist but retain at least some
of the unique characteristics of their traditional culture.
Like a salad’s ingredients, different cultures are brought together, but rather than
coalescing into a single homogeneous culture, retain their own distinct flavors. In the
United States, New York City, with its many unique ethnic communities like “Little
India,” “Little Odessa,” and “Chinatown” is considered an example of a salad bowl
society.
India's 22 official languages and countless dialects exemplify a salad bowl society.
Each language carries its own cultural heritage. People can identify with their
regional language while also understanding Hindi, the national language, creating a
sense of unity in diversity.
The salad bowl theory asserts that it is not necessary for people to give up their
cultural heritage in order to be considered members of the dominant society. For
example, African Americans do not need to stop observing Kwanzaa rather than
Christmas in order to be considered “Americans.” Also, celebrating Diwali instead of
Christmas does not diminish one's Indian identity.
On the negative side, the cultural differences encouraged by the salad bowl model
can divide a society resulting in prejudice and discrimination. In addition, critics
point to a 2007 study conducted by American political scientist Robert Putnam
showing that people living in salad bowl multicultural communities were less likely to
vote or volunteer for community improvement projects.
Characteristics of a Multicultural Society
Multicultural societies are characterized by people of different races, ethnicities,
and nationalities living together in the same community. In multicultural
communities, people retain, pass down, celebrate, and share their unique cultural
ways of life, languages, art, traditions, and behaviors.

-- 2 of 4 --

3
(formerly CrackGradeB)
MULTICULTURALISM
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
The characteristics of multiculturalism often spread into the community’s public
schools, where curricula are crafted to introduce young people to the qualities and
benefits of cultural diversity.
Though sometimes criticized as a form of “political correctness,” educational
systems in multicultural societies stress the histories and traditions of minorities
in classrooms and textbooks. A 2018 study conducted by the Pew Research Center
found that the “post-millennial” generation of people ages 6 to 21 are the most
diverse generation in American society.
Far from an exclusively American phenomenon, examples of multiculturalism are found
worldwide. In Argentina, for example, newspaper articles, and radio and television
programs are commonly presented in English, German, Italian, French, or Portuguese,
as well as the country’s native Spanish. Indeed, Argentina’s constitution promotes
immigration by recognizing the right of individuals to retain multiple citizenships from
other countries.
As a key element of the country’s society, Canada adopted multiculturalism as official
policy during the premiership of Pierre Trudeau in the 1970s and 1980s. In addition,
the Canadian constitution, along with laws such as the Canadian Multiculturalism Act
and the Broadcasting Act of 1991, recognize the importance of multicultural diversity.
According to the Canadian Library and Archives, over 200,000 people—representing at
least 26 different ethnocultural groups—immigrate to Canada every year.
Why Diversity is Important
• Proponents of cultural diversity argue that it makes humanity stronger and
may, in fact, be vital to its long-term survival.
• In 2001, the General Conference of UNESCO took this position when it
asserted in its Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity that “...cultural
diversity is as necessary for humankind as biodiversity is for nature.”
• Today, entire countries, workplaces, and schools are increasingly made up
of various cultural, racial, and ethnic groups. By recognizing and learning
about these various groups, communities build trust, respect, and understanding
across all cultures.
• Communities and organizations in all settings benefit from the different
backgrounds, skills, experiences, and new ways of thinking that come with
cultural diversity.
•
Indian Constitution: Providing Multicultural Rights

-- 3 of 4 --

4
(formerly CrackGradeB)
MULTICULTURALISM
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
Article 14-16: Right to equality, including equality before law, prohibition of
discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth, and
equality of opportunity in matters of employment.
Article 25-28: Right to freedom of conscience and free profession, practice, and
propagation of religion.
Article 29: Right of any section of citizens to conserve their culture, language or script.
Article 30: Right of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of
their choice.

-- 4 of 4 --

