1
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Five Year Plans and NITI Aayog
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
FIVE YEAR PLANS
Introduction:
Indian planning is an open process. Plan making in India has evolved as a
responsive democratic political process and the culmination of the same in the
final document is an impressive manifestation of the workings of an open society.
History Of Planning in India & Origin of Five-Year Plans:
Though the planned economic development in India began in 1951 with the
inception of First Five Year Plan, theoretical efforts had begun much earlier, even
prior to the independence.
Setting up of National Planning Committee by Indian National Congress in 1938,
The Bombay Plan & Gandhian Plan in 1944, Peoples Plan in 1945 (by post war
reconstruction Committee of Indian Trade Union), Sarvodaya Plan in 1950 by
Jaiprakash Narayan were steps in this direction.
➢ Five-Year Plans (FYPs) are centralized and integrated national economic
programs.
➢ Joseph Stalin implemented the first FYP in the Soviet Union in the late
1920s. Most communist states and several capitalist countries subsequently
have adopted them. China and India both continue to use FYPs, although China
renamed its Eleventh FYP, from 2006 to 2010, a guideline (guihua), rather
than a plan (jihua), to signify the central government’s more hands-off approach
to development.
➢ After independence, India launched its First FYP in 1951, under socialist
influence of first Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru. The process began with setting
up of Planning Commission in March 1950 in pursuance of declared objectives
of the Government to promote a rapid rise in the standard of living of the
people by efficient exploitation of the resources of the country, increasing
production and offering opportunities to all for employment in the service of the
community. The Planning Commission was charged with the responsibility of
making assessment of all resources of the country, augmenting deficient
resources, formulating plans for the most effective and balanced utilization
of resources and determining priorities.

-- 1 of 20 --

2
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Five Year Plans and NITI Aayog
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
OUTLINE OF VARIOUS FIVE-YEAR PLANS:
Plan
First Plan
(1951 - 56)
It was based on Harrod-Domar Model (growth in an economy is dependent
on the level of savings and investment therein).
The Plan Focused
transport
on agriculture, Price stability, power and
It was a successful plan primarily because of good harvests in the last two
years of the plan. Objectives of rehabilitation of refugees, food self-sufficiency
& control of prices were more or less achieved.
The Plan is also called
Second Plan
(1956 - 61)
Mahalanobis Plan.
The Plan Focussed on rapid industrialization- heavy & basic
industries . Advocated huge imports through foreign loans.
Third Plan
At its conception, it was felt that Indian economy has entered a “take- off
stage”. Therefore, its aim was to make India a 'self-reliant' and 'self-
generating' economy.
Based on the experience of first two plans (agricultural production was seen
as limiting factor in India’s economic development), agriculture was given top
priority to support the exports and industry.
(1961 - 66)
Target
Growth: 5.6% The Plan was thorough failure in reaching the targets due to unforeseen
events - Chinese aggression (1962), Indo-Pak war (1965), severe drought
1965-66. Due to conflicts the approach during the later phase was shifted
from development to defense & development.
This plan was also called Gadgil plan.
Actual Growth:
2.8%
Failure of Third Plan that of the devaluation of rupee (to boost
exports) along with inflationary recession led to postponement of
Fourth FYP. Three Annual Plans were introduced instead.
Three Annual

-- 2 of 20 --

3
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Five Year Plans and NITI Aayog
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
Plans (1966-
69)
Plan holiday.
During these plans a whole new agricultural strategy was implemented.
It involving wide-spread distribution of high-yielding varieties of seeds,
extensive use of fertilizers, exploitation of irrigation potential and soil
conservation.
Fourth Plan
(1969 - 74)
Refusal of supply of essential equipments and raw materials from the
allies during Indo Pak war resulted in twin objectives of “growth with
stability “and “progressive achievement of self-reliance “for the Fourth
Plan.
Main emphasis was on growth rate of agriculture to enable other sectors
to move forward.
Influx of Bangladeshi refugees before and after 1971 Indo-Pak war was
an important issue along with price situation deteriorating to crisis
proportions and the plan is considered as big failure.
Nationalization of 14 banks in 1969.
Fifth Plan
(1974-79)
Target Growth:
4.4% Actual
Growth: 4.8%
It proposed to achieve two main objectives: 'removal of poverty'
(Garibi Hatao) and 'attainment of self-reliance'
Promotion of high rate of growth, better distribution of income and
significant growth in the domestic rate of savings were seen as key
instruments.
20 point programme.
The final Draft of fifth plan was prepared and launched by D.P. Dhar
Due to high inflation, cost calculations for the Plan proved to be
completely wrong and the original public sector outlay had to be
revised upwards.
Rolling Plan
(1978 - 80)
There were 2 Sixth Plans. Janta Govt. put forward a plan for 1978- 1983
emphasizing on employment, in contrast to Nehru Model which the Govt
criticized for concentration of power, widening inequality & for mounting
poverty. However, the government lasted for only 2 years. Congress Govt.
returned to power in 1980 and launched a different plan aimed at directly
attacking on the problem of poverty by creating conditions of an expanding
economy.
Sixth Plan
(1980 - 85)
The plan focuses on increasing national income, modernizing
technology, and reducing poverty and unemployment through schemes
like TRYSEM, IRDP, and NREP.
Broadly, the sixth Plan could be taken as a success as most of the target
were realized even though during the last year (1984-85) many parts of
the country faced severe famine conditions and agricultural output was
less than the record output of previous year.
• establishment of NABARD

-- 3 of 20 --

4
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Five Year Plans and NITI Aayog
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
Seventh Plan
(1985 - 90)
The Plan aimed at accelerating food grain production, increasing
employment opportunities & raising productivity with focus on ‘food, work
& productivity’.
The plan was very successful as the economy recorded 6% growth rate
against the targeted 5% with the decade of 80’s struggling out of the’ Hindu
Rate of Growth’.
Eighth Plan
The eighth plan was postponed by two years because of political
uncertainty at the Centre
(1992 - 97)
Target Growth
5.6 %
Actual Growth
6.8%
Worsening Balance of Payment position, rising debt burden, widening
budget deficits, recession in industry and inflation were the key issues
during the launch of the plan.
The plan undertook drastic policy measures to combat the bad
economic situation and to undertake an annual average growth of 5.6%
through introduction of fiscal & economic reforms including
liberalisation under the Prime Ministership of Shri P V Narasimha Rao.
Some of the main economic outcomes during eighth plan period
were:
Rapid economic growth (highest annual growth rate so far – 6.8 %),
High growth of agriculture and allied sector, and manufacturing
sector, growth in exports and imports, improvement in trade and current
account deficit.
High growth rate was achieved even though the share of public sector
in total investment had declined considerably to about 34 %.
Ninth Plan
(1997-2002)
The Plan prepared under United Front Government focused on
“Growth With Social Justice & Equality.
“Ninth Plan aimed to depend predominantly on the private sector.
Tenth Plan
(2002 - 2007)
Recognizing that economic growth can’t be the only objective of national
plan, Tenth Plan had set ‘monitorable targets’. The targets included
reduction in gender gaps in literacy and wage rate, reduction in Infant
& maternal mortality rates, improvement in literacy, access to potable
drinking water cleaning of major polluted rivers, etc.
Eleventh Plan
(2007 - 2012)
Eleventh Plan was aimed “Towards Faster & More Inclusive Growth”
Prepared by C Rangarajan.

-- 4 of 20 --

5
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Five Year Plans and NITI Aayog
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
The broad vision for 11th Plan included several inter related
components like rapid growth reducing poverty & creating
employment opportunities, access to essential services in health &
education, especially for the poor, extension of employment
opportunities using National Rural Employment Guarantee
Programme, environmental sustainability, reduction of gender
inequality etc.
Accordingly various targets were laid down like reduction in
unemployment (to less than 5 % among educated youth) & headcount
ratio of poverty (by 10 %), reduction in dropout rates, gender gap in
literacy, infant mortality, total fertility, malnutrition in age group of 0-3 (to
half its present level), etc.
The Eleventh Plan started well with the first year achieving a growth
rate of 9.3 per cent, however the growth decelerated to 6.7 per cent rate in
2008-09 following the global financial crisis.
The growth targets for the first three Plans were set with respect to National Income. In the Fourth Plan
it was Net Domestic Product. In all the Plans thereafter, Gross Domestic Product has been used.

-- 5 of 20 --

6
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Five Year Plans and NITI Aayog
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
TWELFTH FIVE YEAR PLAN (2012-17):
The Twelfth Plan commenced at a time when the global economy was going
through a second financial crisis, precipitated by the sovereign debt problems of the
Eurozone which erupted in the last year of the Eleventh Plan.
The Twelfth Plan therefore emphasized that our first priority must be to bring the
economy back to rapid growth while ensuring that the growth is both inclusive
and sustainable.
The broad vision and aspirations which the Twelfth Plan seeks to fulfil are reflected in
the subtitle: ‘Faster, Sustainable, and More Inclusive Growth’.
Apart from the global slowdown, the domestic economy has also run up against
several internal constraints. Macro-economic imbalances have surfaced following
the fiscal expansion undertaken after 2008 to give a fiscal stimulus to the economy.
Inflationary pressures have built up.
The policy challenge in the Twelfth Plan is, therefore, two-fold. The immediate
challenge is to reverse the observed deceleration in growth by reviving investment
as quickly as possible. From a longer-term perspective, the Plan must put in place
policies that can leverage the many strengths of the economy to bring it back to
its real Growth potential.
Achieving sustained growth would require long term increase in investment and
savings rate. Bringing the economy back to 9 per cent growth by the end of the
Twelfth Plan requires fixed investment rate to rise to 35 per cent of GDP by the
end of the Plan period.
Monitorable Targets of the Plan:
Twenty-Five core indicators listed below reflect the vision of rapid, sustainable & more
inclusive growth of the twelfth Plan:
Economic Growth:
Real GDP Growth Rate of 8.0 per cent.
Agriculture Growth Rate of 4.0 per cent.
Manufacturing Growth Rate of 10.0 per cent.
Poverty and Employment
Head-count ratio of consumption poverty to be reduced by 10 percentage
points over the preceding estimates by the end of Twelfth FYP.

-- 6 of 20 --

7
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Five Year Plans and NITI Aayog
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
Education
Mean Years of Schooling to increase to seven years by the end of Twelfth FYP.
Health
Reduce IMR to 25 and MMR to 1 per 1,000 live births, and improve Child Sex
ratio (0–6 years) to 950 by the end of the Twelfth FYP.
Reduce Total Fertility Rate to 2.1 by the end of Twelfth FYP.
Infrastructure, Including Rural Infrastructure
Increase investment in infrastructure as a percentage of GDP to 9 per cent by the
end of Twelfth FYP.
Increase the Gross Irrigated Area from 90 million hectare to 103 million hectare
by the end of Twelfth FYP.
Increase rural tele-density to 70 per cent by the end of Twelfth FYP.
Environment and Sustainability
Increase green cover (as measured by satellite imagery) by 1 million hectare every
year during the Twelfth FYP.
Add 30,000 MW of renewable energy capacity in the Twelfth Plan
Reduce emission intensity of GDP in line with the target of 20 per cent to 25 per
cent reduction over 2005 levels by 2020.
Service Delivery
Provide access to banking services to 90 per cent Indian households by the end of
Twelfth FYP.
NITI Aayog
➢ The National Institution for Transforming India, also called NITI Aayog, was
formed via a resolution of the Union Cabinet on January 1, 2015.
➢ NITI Aayog is the premier policy ‘Think Tank’ of the Government of India,
providing both, directional and policy inputs.
➢ While designing strategic and long-term policies and programmes for the
Government of India, NITI Aayog also provides relevant technical advice to
the Centre and States.
➢ The Government of India, in keeping with its reform agenda, constituted the NITI
Aayog to replace the erstwhile Planning Commission instituted in 1950.
➢ NITI Aayog is developing itself as a state-of-the-art resource center with the
necessary knowledge and skills that will enable it to act with speed, promote

-- 7 of 20 --

8
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Five Year Plans and NITI Aayog
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
research and innovation, provide strategic policy vision for the government,
and deal with contingent issues.
It is supported by an attached office, Development Monitoring and Evaluation
Organization (DMEO), Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) and an autonomous body,
National Institute of Labour Economics Research and Development (NILERD).

-- 8 of 20 --

9
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Five Year Plans and NITI Aayog
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455

-- 9 of 20 --

10
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Five Year Plans and NITI Aayog
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455

-- 10 of 20 --

11
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Five Year Plans and NITI Aayog
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455

-- 11 of 20 --

12
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Five Year Plans and NITI Aayog
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
IMPORTANT INITIATIVES OF NITI AAYOG:
Various Task forces of NITI AAYOG till date:
Task-force on Agricultural Development headed by Dr. Arvind Panagariya.
Task-Force on Use of Technologies for Agriculture Insurance: headed by Dr.
P.K.Agarwal.
Task-Force on Elimination of Poverty - headed by Dr. Arvind Panagariya
Task-Force on Project/ Program Management headed by Amitabh Kant.
Atal Innovation Mission: The Government has set up Atal Innovation Mission (AIM)
in NITI Aayog with a view to strengthen the country’s innovation and
entrepreneurship ecosystem by creating institutions and programs that spur
innovation in schools, colleges, and entrepreneurs in general. In 2016-17, the
following major schemes were rolled out:
a. Atal Tinkering Labs (ATLs): To foster creativity and scientific temper in
students, AIM is helping to establish 500 ATLs in schools across India,
where students can design and make small prototypes to solve challenges
they see around them, using rapid prototyping technologies that have
emerged in recent years.
b. Atal Incubation Centres (AICs): AIM will provide financial support of Rs.10
crore and capacity building for setting AICs across India, which will help
startups expand quicker and enable innovation-entrepreneurship, in core
sectors such as manufacturing, transport, energy, education, agriculture,
water and sanitation, etc.
ATL Sarthi:
Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) – NITI Aayog launched Atal Saarthi, a
comprehensive self-monitoring framework to strengthen the ever-
growing ecosystem of Atal Tinkering Labs (ATL).
Atal Innovation Mission is establishing Atal Tinkering Laboratories (ATLs) in
schools across India to foster curiosity, creativity, and imagination in young
minds; and inculcate skills such as design thinking mindset, computational
thinking, adaptive learning, physical computing etc. As of date, AIM has
funded 10,000 schools to establish Atal Tinkering Labs (ATLs).
Mentor India is a strategic nation-building program to engage mentors
who can lead the way for students of Atal Tinkering Labs across India.
We call them "Mentors of Change" who volunteer for mentorship and help
students practice future skills such as design thinking. Mentors of Change
are instrumental in making the Atal Tinkering Labs a successful platform for

-- 12 of 20 --

13
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Five Year Plans and NITI Aayog
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
students by joining in experimenting, innovating, and bringing their
knowledge to practice.
Aspirational Districts Programme:
The Aspirational Districts Programme is a flagship initiative of the Government of
India that targets to effectively transform the most
under-developed districts across the country.
Launched by the Honorable Prime Minister Shri.
Narendra Modi in 2018, the ADP aims to expedite
the transformation of 112 under developed
districts across 28 States.
With States as the key drivers, this program focuses
on identifying low hanging fruits for immediate
improvement and measuring progress made across 49
Key Performance Indicators under 5 broad socio-economic themes:
Health and Nutrition, Education, Agriculture and Water Resources, Financial
Inclusion and Skill Development and Infrastructure.
The programme, a policy priority of the Government of India, is anchored by NITI
Aayog which works in tandem with central and state governments. The institutional
structure adopted in the Aspirational Districts Programme is based on an inclusive
approach to governance – termed as “Sabka Saath Sabka Vikas” which aims to
facilitate growth and development of the entire district, rather than any single
population group. This motto is mirrored in the principle of Leave No One Behind
(LNOB), the central and transformative promise of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
NITI Aayog has developed and uses “The Champions of Change” dashboard for real
time data collection and monitoring. The performance of the Aspirational Districts are
available in the public domain portal named “Champions of Change” at
championsofchange.gov.in
Women Entrepreneurship Programme
Basic Info
• Name: Swavalambini – Women Entrepreneurship Programme

-- 13 of 20 --

14
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Five Year Plans and NITI Aayog
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
• Launched by: Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE)
• In collaboration with: NITI Aayog
• Implemented by: National Institute for Entrepreneurship and Small Business
Development
The Swavalambini Women Entrepreneurship Programme, launched by the Ministry of
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship in collaboration with NITI Aayog, aims
to promote women entrepreneurship in India. The programme specifically targets
female students in Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) and focuses on developing an
entrepreneurial mindset, along with providing essential skills, training, mentorship,
and financial support to help them build and scale their ventures.
The programme aims to ensure that at least 10% of the participants who undergo the
Entrepreneurship Development Programme (EDP) successfully establish their own
enterprises, thereby contributing to a stronger ecosystem of women-led businesses in
India.
Shoonya Programme
The “Shoonya – Zero Pollution Mobility” campaign aims to improve air quality in
India by accelerating the deployment of electric vehicles (EVs) for ride-hailing and
delivery services. The campaign is administered by NITI Aayog and has over 130
corporate partners. Shoonya, meaning zero in Sanskrit, implies the beginning and
origination of possibilities. Inspired by this connotation, the Shoonya campaign plans
to revolutionise the transport sector with a radical and urgent transition to zero-
emission vehicles. The campaign aims to raise awareness about EVs among
consumers and recognise industry efforts while charting a pathway to 100%
electrification in India’s urban final-mile connectivity and delivery sector.
Aspirational Blocks Programme (ABP):
Launched on January 7, 2023.
The programme focuses on improving governance to enhance the quality of life of
citizens and service delivery in the remotest and less developed blocks of India.
An Inter-Ministerial Committee in consultation with States has identified 500 blocks
from across 27 States and 4 Union Territories of India for the ABP. The committee also
recommended that the number of blocks in a State/UT be based on population
(carrying a weightage of 25%) and the per capita GDP of the State/UT (carrying a
weightage of 75%). It also advised that at least one block is selected from each of
the 112 Aspirational Districts. These 500 blocks are located across 329 districts in
27 States and 4 UTs. Of these, 160 blocks are from the 112 Aspirational Districts.

-- 14 of 20 --

15
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Five Year Plans and NITI Aayog
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
Each block will focus on monitoring key socio-economic indicators categorized
under major themes:

-- 15 of 20 --

16
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Five Year Plans and NITI Aayog
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455

-- 16 of 20 --

17
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Five Year Plans and NITI Aayog
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455

-- 17 of 20 --

18
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Five Year Plans and NITI Aayog
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
This ambitious programme identifies Block Officials as Leaders of Change, equiped
with the right skills and competencies, to steer and drive transformation in their
blocks. These grassroot administrators will work under the encouragement, guidance
and support of their respective state and district administrations to achieve their
defined strategies and output.
ASPIRATIONAL BLOCKS STRATEGY:
The Aspirational Blocks strategy hinges upon three broad contours:
• Convergence (of Central & State Schemes),
• Collaboration (between NITI Aayog, Central Ministries, State Departments, District &
Block Administration) and,
• Competition among blocks driven by a spirit of mass Movement.
CAPACITY BUILDING:
Capacity building is a central component of the ABP with the emphasis on enhancing
governance via capacity building. Capacity building under ABP includes enabling the
stakeholders with the necessary expertise, knowledge, and assets required for effective
execution of plans. The capacity building strategy is centred on:
• Programme Orientation and Leadership training: All Blocks-Level Officials and key
stakeholders of ABP shall undergo an orientation that would help prepare them as
Leaders of Change along with an understanding of programme objectives, key
components and implementation strategy.
• Building domain expertise: The Block-level Officials shall be provided training and
exposure on key priority sectors with an aim to build capacity on planning,
implementation and monitoring of progress and outcomes in these priority sectors.
ATAL COMMUNITY INNOVATION CENTRES (ACICS) are a means to drive
innovations towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals through novel
solutions in the underserved regions of the country. ACICs seek to promote and
propagate the benefits of technology led innovations to solve SDG problems by
developing a PPP based participatory model in which the grant-in-aid by AIM has to be
matched.
ATAL NEW INDIA CHALLENGE (ANIC) is a flagship programme of Atal Innovation
Mission, NITI Aayog. The programme aims to seek, select, support and nurture
technology-based innovations that solve sectoral challenges of national

-- 18 of 20 --

19
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Five Year Plans and NITI Aayog
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455
importance and societal relevance. The primary goals of the ANIC programme is
to incentivize innovations in areas critical to India’s development and growth –
Education, Health, Water and Sanitation, Agriculture, Food Processing, Housing,
Energy, Mobility, Space Application etc. ANIC solicits innovations in the prototype
stage and supports the selected start-ups through to the commercialization stage over a
course of 12 – 18 months by funding up to INR 1 crore and other associated support
from the AIM innovation ecosystem.
THE INDIA ENERGY PORTAL (IEP) presently houses NITI Aayog’s flagship initiatives,
the India Energy Security Scenarios, 2047 and Energy Dashboards, along with
preliminary analysis, data and links to other major energy sector publications for India.
In the future, the Portal will accommodate other Energy Division efforts such as Energy
Modeling, Geospatial Energy Map of India and other significant research reports.
The NGO DARPAN was earlier maintained by erstwhile Planning Commission,
which has been replaced by the NITI Aayog w.e.f. 1st January, 2015. The Portal,
therefore, is being maintained at present under the aegis of NITI Aayog. NITI Aayog
invites all Voluntary Organizations (VOs)/ Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) to
Sign Up on the Portal.
VOs/NGOs play a major role in the development of the nation by supplementing the
efforts of the Government. This portal enables VOs/NGOs to enroll centrally and thus
facilitates creation of a repository of information about VOs/NGOs, Sector/State wise.
The Portal facilitates VOs/NGOs to obtain a system generated Unique ID, as and
when signed. The Unique ID is mandatory to apply for grants under various schemes of
Ministries/Departments/Governments Bodies.
‘SAMAVESH’ is a programme launched by the NITI Aayog to link together various
lead Knowledge and Research Institutions to catalyse development processes,
enhance institutional capacity development and enable a field level interface with the
community for mutual enrichment.
As part of this, NITI Aayog seeks to deepen and extend its institutional capacity
through networking and partnerships with reputed knowledge & research
institutions to create an ecosystem of evidence - based policy research. This
network will enable efficient knowledge sharing and information exchange among all
partners to fulfil their role in transformative policy reform so as to achieve sustainable
and more inclusive development in line with Sustainable Development Goals as well as
the 15 year Vision, 7 year strategy and 3 year action plan being developed by the NITI
Aayog.

-- 19 of 20 --

20
(formerly CrackGradeB)
Five Year Plans and NITI Aayog
YouTube Channel
Telegram Channel
www.cgbmentors.com| info@cgbmentors.com | 9310558455

-- 20 of 20 --

