BOOK: _OceanofPDF.com_Principles_and_Practices_of_Banking_-_IIBF.pdf
TOTAL PAGES: 961


=== PAGE 1 ===


=== PAGE 2 ===
PRINCIPLES &
PRACTICES OF BANKING

=== PAGE 3 ===
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF BANKING & FINANCE
(ISO 9001:2015 Certified)
Kohinoor City, Commercial-II, Tower-1, 2nd & 3rd Floor,
Kirol Road, Off-L.B.S. Marg, Kurla-West,
Mumbai-400070
Established on 30th April 1928
MISSION
• To develop professionally qualified and competent bankers and finance professionals primarily through
a process of education, training, examination, consultancy/counselling and continuing professional
development programs.
VISION
• To be the premier Institute for developing and nurturing competent professionals in banking and
finance field.
OBJECTIVES
• To facilitate study of theory and practice of banking and finance.
• To test and certify attainment of competence in the profession of banking and finance.
• To collect, analyse and provide information needed by the professionals in banking and finance.
• To promote continuous professional development.
• To promote and undertake research relating to Operations, Products, Instruments, Processes, etc.,
in banking and finance and to encourage innovation and creativity among finance professionals so
that they could face competition and succeed.
COMMITTED TO PROFESSIONAL EXCELLENCE
Website: www.iibf.org.in

=== PAGE 4 ===
(For JAIIB/Diploma in Banking &
Finance Examination)
Indian Institute of Banking & Finance
PRINCIPLES &
PRACTICES OF BANKING

=== PAGE 5 ===
© INDIAN INSTITUTE OF BANKING & FINANCE, MUMBAI, 2023
(This book has been published by Indian Institute of Banking & Finance. Permission of the Institute is essential for
reproduction of any portion of this book. The views expressed herein are not necessarily the views of the Institute.)
All rights reserved under the copyright act. No part of this publication may be reproduced, transcribed, transmitted,
stored in a retrieval system or translated into any language or computer language, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, magnetic, optical, chemical, manual, photocopy or otherwise without the prior permission of
the copyright owner. Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this publication may be liable to criminal
prosecution and civil claims for damages.
First published, 2023
MACMILLAN EDUCATION INDIA PRIVATE LIMITED
Bengaluru Delhi Chennai Kolkata Mumbai Ahmedabad Bhopal
Chandigarh Coimbatore Guwahati Hyderabad Lucknow Madurai
Nagpur Patna Pune Thiruvananthapuram Visakhapatnam Kochi
Bhubaneshwar Noida Sahibabad Hubli
ISBN: 978-93-5666-032-8
Published by Macmillan Education India Private Limited
(formerly Macmillan Publishers India Private Limited),
21, Patullos Road, Chennai 600002, India
“This book is meant for educational and learning purposes. The author(s) of the book has/have taken all reasonable care to ensure that the contents of the
book do not violate any copyright or other intellectual property rights of any person in any manner whatsoever. In the event the author(s) has/have been
unable to track any source and if any copyright has been inadvertently infringed, please notify the publisher in writing for any corrective action.”
PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES OF BANKING
First Edition (2023)
Revised & Updated by Mr. P.S. Khandelwal, Retd. Chief Compliance Officer, IndusInd Bank (Modules A, B and D) and
Mr. Butchi Babu, Retd. General Manager, Bank of India (Module C)
Vetted by Mr. S. Rajendran Nair, Retd Chief Manager, Indian Overseas Bank (Modules A, B & D) and Mr. Anand Shrimali,
Retd. DGM-IT, Bank of India (Module C)

=== PAGE 6 ===
FOREWORD
Formal education will make you a living; self-education will make you a fortune.
–Jim Rohn
The banking sector, currently, is experiencing a transformation catalysed by digitalization and information
explosion with the customer as the focal point. Besides, competition from NBFCs, FinTechs, changing
business models, growing importance of risk and compliance have contributed to this radical shift. Such
an ever-evolving ecosystem requires strategic agility and constant upgradation of skill levels on the part
of the Banking & Finance professionals to chart a clear pathway for their professional development.
The mission of the Indian Institute of Banking & Finance is to develop professionally qualified and
competent bankers and finance executives primarily through a process of education, training, examination,
counseling and continuing professional development programs. In line with the Mission, the Institute
has been offering a bouquet of courses and certifications for capacity building of the banking personnel.
The flagship courses/examinations offered by the Institute are the JAIIB, CAIIB and the Diploma in
Banking & Finance (DB&F) which have gained wide recognition among banks and financial institutions.
With banking witnessing tectonic shifts, there was an imperative need to revisit the existing syllabi for
the flagship courses.
The pivotal point for revising the syllabi was to ensure that, in addition to acquiring basic knowledge, the
candidates develop concept-based skills for keeping pace with the developments happening in the financial
ecosystem and to ensure greater value addition to the flagship courses and to make them more practical
and contemporary. This will culminate in creating a rich pool of knowledgeable and competent banking
& finance professionals who are capable of contributing to the sustainable growth of their organizations.
Keeping in view the above objectives, the Institute had constituted a high-level Syllabi Revision
Committee comprising of members from public sector banks, private sector banks, co-operative banks
and academicians. On the basis of the feedback received from various banks and changes suggested by
the Committee, the syllabi of JAIIB & CAIIB have since been finalized.
The revised JAIIB syllabi will now have four compulsory subjects as under:
1. Indian Economy & Indian Financial System
2. Principles & Practices of Banking
3. Accounting & Financial Management for Bankers
4. Retail Banking & Wealth Management
The new subject on Indian Economy & Indian Financial System will cover the basics of economics
and financial system prevalent in India. This will familiarise the candidates with the evolving financial
ecosystem of the country.
Insofar as the book on Accounting & Financial Management is concerned, two new modules viz Financial
Management and Taxation & Fundamentals of Costing have been introduced. With bankers having to
cater to the requirements of varied industries, it is imperative that they have an underlying understanding

=== PAGE 7 ===
of the relationships between cost accounting, financial accounting, management accounting and financial
management. Some of the other topics that have been covered are Cost of Capital, Equipment Leasing,
GST, Standard Costing, Marginal Costing, Budgetary Control system etc.
The books on Principles & Practices of Banking and Retail Banking & Wealth Management have been
thoroughly revised and updated.
As is the practice followed by the Institute, a dedicated courseware for every paper/subject is published.
The present courseware on Principles and Practices of Banking has now been authored in line with the
revised syllabus for the subject. The book follows the same modular approach adopted by the Institute
in the earlier editions/publications.
While the Institute is committed to revise and update the courseware from time to time, the book should,
however, not be considered as the only source of information / reading material while preparing for the
examinations due to rapid changes witnessed in all the areas affecting banking & finance. The students
have to keep themselves abreast with the current developments by referring to economic newspapers/
journals, articles, books and Government / Regulators’ publications / websites etc. Questions will be
based on the recent developments related to the syllabus.
Considering that the courseware cannot be published frequently, the Institute will continue the practice
of keeping candidates informed about the latest developments by placing important updates/Master
Circulars/ Master Directions on its website and through publications like IIBF Vision, Bank Quest, etc.
The courseware has been updated with the help of Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) drawn from respective
fields and vetted by practitioners to ensure accuracy and correctness. The Institute acknowledges with
gratitude the valuable contributions rendered by the SMEs in updating/vetting the courseware.
We welcome suggestions for improvement of the courseware.
Mumbai Biswa Ketan Das
2023 Chief Executive Officer
vi | FOREWORD

=== PAGE 8 ===
RECOMMENDED READING
The Institute has prepared comprehensive courseware in the form of study kits to facilitate
preparation for the examination without intervention of the teacher. An attempt has been made to
cover fully the syllabus prescribed for each module/subject and the presentation of topics may not
always be in the same sequence as given in the syllabus.
Candidates are also expected to take note of all the latest developments relating to the subject
covered in the syllabus by referring to Financial Papers, Economic Journals, Latest Books and
Publications in the subjects concerned.

=== PAGE 9 ===


=== PAGE 10 ===
PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES OF BANKING
SYLLABUS
MODULE A: GENERAL BANKING OPERATIONS
Banker-Customer Relationship
Requirements to be Called a Bank, Banker-Customer Relationship, Bank as a Trustee, Bailee-Bailor
Relationship, Agent-Principal Relationship, Lessor and Lessee, Indemnifier and Indemnified, Different Deposit
Products or Services, Services to Customers and Investors
AML-KYC Guidelines
Money Laundering & Financing of Terrorism Risks, AML Framework in India, Know Your Customer Policy,
Organisational Set-up for AML, Obligations under PMLA, Risk Management, Obligations under International
Agreements, FATF Identified Jurisdictions, Correspondent Banks, Reporting Under FATCA/ CRS, Reporting
Obligations, Implications of Non-compliance of PMLA Obligations, Secrecy Obligations
Operational Aspects of KYC
Know Your Customers (KYC) Norms, Wire Transfers, Other Operations - Regulations, Central KYC Records
Registry (CKYCR), Monitoring of Transactions
Opening Accounts of Various Types of Customers
Personal Accounts, Accounts of Other Customers, Norms for Opening Current Accounts, Obtaining Photographs
of Account Holders, Legal Entity Identifier
Operational Aspects of Deposit Accounts
Salient Feature of Deposit Accounts, Interest on Deposit Accounts, Prohibitions & Exemptions, Inoperative
Accounts & Unclaimed Deposits, Operational Instructions in Joint Accounts, Nomination Facility, Other
Operational Guidelines, Attachment Orders, Procedure for Submission of Records to Statutory Authorities
Operational Aspects of Handling Clearing/Collection/Cash
Cheque Truncation System (CTS), RBI Guidelines on Collection of Instruments, Cash and its Custody, Security
Arrangements at Branches and ATMs
Banker’s Special Relationship
Mandate – Definition, Power of Attorney (POA) – Definition, Banker’s Lien, Right of Set-off, Right of
Appropriation
Foreign Exchange Remittance Facilities for Individuals
Evolution of FEMA, Definitions, Bringing in and Taking out Foreign Exchange, Inward Remittances, Outward
Remittances, Indo - Nepal Remittance Scheme
Operational Aspects of NRI Business
Permitted Accounts in India for NRIs and PIOs, Accounts in India of Foreign Nationals Visiting India, Special
Non-Resident Rupee Account – SNRR Account, Remittance of Assets Held by NRIs/ PIOs, Acquisition and
Transfer of Immovable Property in India by a Non-Resident Indian (NRI), Creation of Charge on Immovable
Property in India, Repatriation of Income and Sale Proceeds of Assets Held Abroad by NRIs, Investments
by NRIs/ PIOs

=== PAGE 11 ===
Foreign Currency Accounts for Residents and Other Aspects
Types of Accounts Permitted, Foreign Currency Denominated Accounts in India, Permitted Foreign Currency
Accounts Outside India, Remittance of Assets by Foreign Nationals not Being PIOs, Modes of Acquiring
Property Outside India by a Resident, Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act 2010
Cash Management Services and Its Importance
Developments in CMS, Importance of Cash Management System, Types of Cash Management Services,
Challenges and Issues
Payment and Collection of Cheques and Other Negotiable Instruments
Negotiable Instruments Act, Payment of a Cheque, Payment in due course – Section 10, Liability of the Paying
Bank – Section 31, Collection of Cheques – Duties of a Collecting Bank, Endorsement of Cheques, Crossing
of Cheques, Forged Instruments, Bouncing (Dishonour) of Cheques, Cheque Truncation System
Responsibility of Paying Bank
Negotiable Instruments Act and Paying Banks, Liability of Paying Banker when Customer’s Signature on the
Cheque is Forged, Payment to be in Due Course for Bank to Seek Protection, Payment in Good Faith without
Negligence of an Instrument on which Alteration is not Apparent, Payment by Bank Under Mistake Whether
Recoverable, Cheque Truncation
Responsibility of Collecting Bank
Statutory Protection to Collecting Bank, Duties of the Collecting Bank
Ancillary Services
Remittances: Introduction, Demand Drafts (DD) and Banker’s Cheques (BC), Mail Transfer (MT), Telegraphic
Transfer (TT), National Electronic Funds Transfer System (NEFT), Real Time Gross Settlement System
(RTGS), Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) Scheme, Mobile Banking in India, Electronic/Digital Payments,
Safe Deposit Lockers, Portfolio Management Services, Merchant Banking, Government Business, Levying
of Service Charges
Financial Inclusion & Financial Literacy
Financial Inclusion by Extension of Banking Services, Use of Mobiles/Tablets in Financial Inclusion Drive,
Financial Literacy, Rural Self Employment Training Institutes (RSETI)
Customer Service Guidelines
Customer Service in Banks, Policy for General Management of the Branches, ATM Operations, Security Issues
and Risk Mitigation Measures, Service at the Counters, Information to the Customers, Special Arrangements
at Branches, Other Provisions
Duties & Rights of a Banker and Customer Rights
Duty of Secrecy & Confidentiality, Duty of Reasonable Care, Garnishee or Attachment Order, Bank’s Rights,
Customer Awareness, Banking Codes and Standards Board of India, Obligations on the Customer
Grievance Redressal & RBI Integrated Ombudsman Scheme 2021
Model Policy on Grievance Redressal, Internal Machinery to Handle Customer Complaints/ Grievances, The
RBI - Integrated Ombudsman Scheme
The Consumer Protection Act, 2019: Preamble, Extent and Definitions
Purpose of The Act, Preamble and Extent, Act not Overriding on Any Other Law, Salient New Aspects
of CPA 2019, Definitions, Various Fora, Consumer Protection Councils, Central Consumer Protection
Authority, Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissions, Jurisdictions of Commissions, Complaints to District
x | SYLLABUS

=== PAGE 12 ===
Commissions, Complaints to State Commissions/ National Commission, Appeals Against Orders of District/
State Commission, Other Aspects, Mediation Process, Product Liability, Unfair Contracts, Data Protection,
The CPA 2019 and Banking Services
The Right to Information Act, 2005
Applicability, Definitions, Right to Information, Obligations of Public Authorities, Designation of Public
Information Officers, Procedure for Obtaining Information, Disposal of Request, Appeal, Orders in Appeal,
Central Information Commission, State Information Commission, Penalties, Act to Have Overriding Effect
MODULE B: FUNCTIONS OF BANKS
Principles of Lending, Different Types of Borrowers, and Types of Credit Facilities
Principles of Lending, Types of Borrowers, Types of Credit Facilities, Fund Based Working Capital Facilities,
Term/ Demand Loans, Non-fund Based Facilities, Other Credit Facilities
Appraisal and Assesement of Credit Facilities
Credit Appraisal, Credit Appraisal techniques, Methods of Assessment of Loans, Assessment of Working
Capital, Assessment of Term Loan
Operational Aspects of Loan Accounts
Interest Rates on Loans, Credit Management, Credit Monitoring, Common Operational Terms/Aspects in Loan
Functions, Operational Process of Handling Loans, Accounting Aspects of Loan Products, Basic Operating
Instructions on Loan Products, Operating Manual for Loans and Advances, Sample Operating Instructions,
Operational Aspects of a Few Common Loan Products, Guidelines on Recovery Agents Engaged by Banks,
Fair Practices Code for Lenders
Types of Collaterals and Their Characteristics
Effectiveness of Securities, What are ‘Secured Loans’ and ‘Unsecured Loans’?, Types of Securities, Land and
Buildings, Goods, Documents of Title to Goods, Advances against Life Insurance Policies, Advance Against
Shares, Advance Against Debentures, Loan against Book Debts, Loan against Term Deposits, Loan against
Gold Ornaments, Supply Bills, Vehicle Finance
Different Modes of Charging Securities
Meaning and Essentials of a Contract, Contract of Agency, Contract of Bailment, Types of Charges, Registration
of Charges
Documentation
Different Types of Documents, Documentation Procedure
Non-Performing Assets/ Stressed Assets
Definition, Income Recognition, Computation of Gross Advances, Gross NPA, Net Advances, and Net NPA,
Asset Classification, Provisioning Norms, Writing Off of NPAs, NPA Management – Requirement of Effective
Mechanism and Granular Data, Framework for Resolution of Stressed Assets, Prudential Norms Applicable
to Restructuring , Other Aspects
Important Laws Relating to Recovery Of Dues
Introduction to Recovery of Debts and Bankruptcy Act, 1993 (DRB), Introduction To SARFAESI Act,
Introduction To The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 513, Introduction To The Legal Services Authorities
Act, 513, Introduction To The Law of Limitation
SYLLABUS | xi

=== PAGE 13 ===
Contracts of Indemnity
Contract of Indemnity Defined , Distinctive Features of Indemnity Contract and Guarantee, Rights of an
Indemnity Holder, Implied Indemnity, Enforceability of Contract of Indemnity, Scope and Application of
Indemnity Contracts to Banks
Contracts of Guarantee & Bank Guarantee
Parties to the Contract, Basic Principles of Contract to be Complied, Consideration, The Liability of the Surety,
Continuing Guarantee, Revocation of a Continuing Guarantee, Death of Surety, Variance in Terms of the
Contract, Discharge of Principal Debtor, Forbearance to Sue, Surety can Claim His Dues from the Principal
Debtor, Security, Implied Promise by the Principal Debtor to Indemnify the Surety, Misrepresentation Made
by the Creditor, Co-sureties for the Same Debt, Release of One Co-surety does not Discharge Other, Bank
Guarantees, Various Types of Bank Guarantees, Banker’s Duty to Honour Guarantee, Issuance of Bank
Guarantee – Precautions to be Taken, Payment Under Bank Guarantee – Precautions to be Taken
Letters of Credit
Letters of Credit – General Consideration, Parties to a Letter of Credit, Types of Letters of Credit, Documents
Under a Letter of Credit, Uniform Customs and Practices for Documentary Credits – UCPDC 600, Payment
Under Letter of Credit – Banks Obligation Primary
Deferred Payment Guarantee
Purpose of Deferred Payment Guarantee, Method of Payment
Laws Relating to Bill Finance
Class of Bills and Laws Governing Bills, Classification of Bills, Various Types of Bill Finance, Bill Finance
and Legal Position of a Banker
Personal Finance
Credit Card, Home Loans, Personal Loans, Consumer Loans
Priority Sector Advances
Applicability, Targets/Sub-Targets for Priority Sector, Categories of Priority Sector, Non-Achievement of
Priority Sector Targets, Common guidelines for Priority Sector Loans, Other Modes of Lending to Priority
Sectors, Other Aspects Related to Priority Sector Lending
Agricultural Finance
Short-Term Loans, Medium/Long-Term Loans, Crop Loan, Revised Scheme for Issue of Kisan Credit Card
(KCC), Selected Activities Under Agricultural Financing, Minimum Support Prices Scheme, Prime Minister
Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY)
Finance to MFIs/Co-Lending Arrangements With NBFCs
Background, Bank Borrowings - Source Of Finance for NBFCS, Bank Finance to NBFCS, Bank Loans
to NBFCS for On-Lending, Bank Loans to NBFCS-MFIs, NBFC-MFI – Channelising Agent for Special
Government Schemes, Co-Lending by Banks and NBFCS to Priority Sector, Framework for Scale Based
Regulation (SBR) for Non-Banking Financial Companies
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in India
Aim of MSMEs, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (MSMED) Act, 667, Policy Package for
MSMEs – Credit/Finance, Measures for Promotion, Development and Enhancement of Competitiveness of
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, Delayed Payments, Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS),
Performance and Credit Rating Scheme, Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Micro and Small Enterprises,
Cluster Based Approach in Financing MSMEs, Common Guidelines / Instructions for Lending to MSME Sector
xii | SYLLABUS

=== PAGE 14 ===
Government Sponsored Schemes
Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana – National Rural Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NRLM), Deendayal Antyodaya
Yojana – National Urban Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NULM), Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY),
MUDRA Loans, Khadi Village Industries Commission (KVIC)
Self-Help Groups
SHG – Definition, Need for SHGs, Forming SHGs, SHGs Under DAY-NRLM/ DAY-NULM Schemes, SHG-
Bank Linkage Programme
MODULE C: BANKING TECHNOLOGY
Essentials of Bank Computerisation
Bank Computerisation, Networking Technologies in Banks, Uninterrupted Power System (UPS), Core Banking,
Data Warehousing and Data Mining
Operational Aspects of CBS Environment
Functions Performed by CBS, Flow of Transactions in CBS, The Accounting of Transactions in CBS, End
of Day (EOD) And Begin of Day (BOD) Operations, End of Day (EOD) Operations, Password Control,
Parameter/Master File, Logical Access Control, Operational Aspects of Security Control in CBS, Role and
Responsibilities of the Bank Under CBS
Alternate Delivery Channels – Digital Banking
Alternate Delivery Channels, Automated Teller Machines (ATMs), Electromagnetic Cards, Electronic Banking,
Customer Protection–Limiting Liability of Customers in Unauthorised Electronic Banking Transactions,
Harmonization of Turn Around Time (TAT) and Customer Compensation for Failed Transactions Using
Authorised Payment Systems
Data Communication Network and EFT Systems
Data Communications Networks, Network Scenario in India: Major Networks, Emerging Trends in
Communications Networks for Banking, Evolution of EFT Systems, Structured Message Transfer System
Using SWIFT, Automated Clearing Systems, Two-Level Funds Transfer System, Emergence of Electronic
Payment Systems in India
Digital Payment Systems – NPCI
Electronic Clearing Systems in India, National Payment Corporation of India (NPCI), Digital Initiatives by
the Government of India
Impact of Technology Adoption and Trends in Banking Technology
Trends in Technology Developments, Role and Uses of Technology Upgradation, Global Trends in Banking
Systems, Impact of Information Technology on Banks, Some emerging technology trends in Banking
Security Considerations and Mitigation Measures in Banks
Risk Concern Areas, Different Types of Threats, Control Mechanism, Computer Audit, Information System
Audit (IS Audit), Information System Security (IS Security), Modus Operandi of Online Frauds and Cyber
Security Awareness, IT Resources Evaluation Requirements, Disaster Recovery Management Objective, Legal
Framework for Electronic Transactions Information Technology Act, G. Gopalakrishana Committee Report,
Cyber Security Framework in Banks, Integrated Ombudsman Scheme, 2021 by RBI
Operational Aspects of Cyber Crimes/Fraud Risk Management in Cyber Tech
Fraud vs Crime, Phases of an Effective Incident Response Plan
SYLLABUS | xiii

=== PAGE 15 ===
Technology Trends in Banking, e-RUPI, Fintech - RegTech, SupTech, Hashtag Banking etc.
e-RUPI, Fintech/Reg Tech/Sup Tech, Social Media Banking, Hashtag Banking, Account Aggregators, Open
Banking
MODULE D: ETHICS IN BANKS AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
Ethics, Business Ethics & Banking: An Integrated Perspective
Values and Ethics, Ethics and Business Values, Business Ethics – Definition, Principles and Practice, An
Ethical Crisis: Is Business Ethics an Oxymoron?, Ethical Foundation of Banking: Finance Depends on Trust,
Ethical Foundation of Being a Professional, Banking Ethics in Global Context: Enron and Its Lesson, Global
Financial Crisis, Ethics in Indian Context: Satyam and Its Lessons, An Indian Bank Case Study
Ethics at the Individual Level
Values, Norms, Beliefs and Their Role, Core Values: The Value of a Value, Morality and Personal Values, Value
– Conflicts: How Should I Live?, Personal Ethics and Business Ethics: Individual Integrity and Responsibility,
The Golden Rule, Understanding Right and Wrong: Doing the Right Thing, Ethical Reasoning and Real-World
Application, Ethical Dilemmas: Resolving Ethical Dilemmas, A Framework of Ethical Decision-Making
Ethical Dimensions: Employees
Abuse of Official Position: Insider Trading, Proprietary Data, Bribes, etc., Obligations to Third Parties, Job
Discrimination, Sexual Harassment, Managing Conflict of Interests, Fair Accounting Practices: Related
Party Transactions, HRM Ethics, Principles of Representation and Work Environment, Employees as Ethics
Ambassadors & Managers as Ethical Leaders
Work Ethics and the Workplace
What Is Work Ethics? Something Bigger Than the Self, Ethical Behaviour at The Workplace: Benefits,
Recognising Ethical Workplaces, Unethical Behaviours: Causes and Remedies, Conducting Personal Business
During Office Time, Taking Credit for Others’ Work, Ethical Lapses and Organizational Culture, Ethics of a
Banker, Whistleblowing in Banks, Whistleblowing Law in India
Banking Ethics: Changing Dynamics
Ethics and Technology, Data Security and Privacy, Intellectual Property Rights, Patents and Proprietary Rights,
Ethics of Information Security
xiv | SYLLABUS

=== PAGE 16 ===
CONTENTS
Foreword v
MODULE A: GENERAL BANKING OPERATIONS
1. Banker-Customer Relationship 3
2. AML- KYC Guidelines 15
3. Operational Aspects of KYC 29
4. Opening Accounts of Various Types of Customers 49
5. Operational Aspects of Deposit Accounts 69
6. Operational Aspects of Handling Clearing/Collection/Cash 99
7. Banker’s Special Relationship 115
8. Foreign Exchange Remittance Facilities for Individuals 121
9. Operational Aspects of NRI Business 143
10. Foreign Currency Accounts for Residents and Other Aspects 161
11. Cash Management Services and its Importance 173
12. Payment and Collection of Cheques and Other Negotiable Instruments 179
13. Responsibility of Paying Bank 191
14. Responsibility of Collecting Bank 201
15. Ancillary Services 207
16. Financial Inclusion & Financial Literacy 223
17. Customer Service Guidelines 233
18. Duties & Rights of a Banker and Customer Rights 247
19. Grievance Redressal & RBI Integrated Ombudsman Scheme 2021 257
20. The Consumer Protection Act, 2019: Preamble, Extent and Definitions 271
21. The Right to Information Act, 2005 297
MODULE B: FUNCTIONS OF BANKS
22. Principles of Lending, Different Types of Borrowers, and Types of Credit Facilities 309
23. Appraisal and Assesement of Credit Facilities 333
24. Operational Aspects of Loan Accounts 367
25. Types of Collaterals and their Characteristics 403

=== PAGE 17 ===
26. Different Modes of Charging Securities 437
27. Documentation 475
28. Non-Performing Assets/ Stressed Assets 483
29. Important Laws Relating to Recovery of Dues 511
30. Contracts of Indemnity 567
31. Contracts of Guarantee & Bank Guarantee 573
32. Letters of Credit 591
33. Deferred Payment Guarantee 601
34. Laws Relating to Bill Finance 605
35. Personal Finance 611
36. Priority Sector Advances 625
37. Agricultural Finance 637
38. Finance to MFIs/Co-Lending Arrangements with NBFCs 653
39. Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in India 665
40. Government Sponsored Schemes 681
41. Self-Help Groups 701
MODULE C: BANKING TECHNOLOGY
42. Essentials of Bank Computerisation 707
43. Operational Aspects of CBS Environment 725
44. Alternate Delivery Channels – Digital Banking 735
45. Data Communication Network and EFT Systems 765
46. Digital Payment Systems – NPCI 789
47. Impact of Technology Adoption and Trends in Banking Technology 809
48. Security Considerations and Mitigation Measures in Banks 827
49. Operational Aspects of Cyber Crimes/Fraud Risk Management in Cyber Tech 871
50. Technology Trends in Banking, e-RUPI, Fintech - RegTech, SupTech, Hashtag Banking etc. 881
MODULE D: ETHICS IN BANKS AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
51. Ethics, Business Ethics & Banking: An Integrated Perspective 895
52. Ethics at the Individual Level 909
53. Ethical Dimensions: Employees 921
54. Work Ethics and the Workplace 927
55. Banking Ethics: Changing Dynamics 939
xvi | CONTENTS

=== PAGE 18 ===
MODULE A
GENERAL BANKING OPERATIONS
Unit 1. Banker-Customer Relationship
Unit 2. AML- KYC Guidelines
Unit 3. Operational Aspects of KYC
Unit 4. Opening Accounts of Various Types of Customers
Unit 5. Operational Aspects of Deposit Accounts
Unit 6. Operational Aspects of Handling Clearing/Collection/ Cash
Unit 7. Banker’s Special Relationship
Unit 8. Foreign Exchange Remittance Facilities for Individuals
Unit 9. Operational Aspects of NRI Business
Unit 10. Foreign Currency Accounts for Residents and Other Aspects
Unit 11. Cash Management Services and its Importance
Unit 12. Payment and Collection of Cheques and Other Negotiable Instruments
Unit 13. Responsibility of Paying Bank
Unit 14. Responsibility of Collecting Bank
Unit 15. Ancillary Services
Unit 16. Financial Inclusion & Financial Literacy
Unit 17. Customer Service Guidelines
Unit 18. Duties & Rights of a Banker and Customer Rights
Unit 19. Grievance Redressal & RBI Integrated Ombudsman Scheme 2021
Unit 20. The Consumer Protection Act, 2019: Preamble, Extent and Definitions
Unit 21. The Right to Information Act, 2005

=== PAGE 19 ===


=== PAGE 20 ===
U N I T
1 BANKER-CUSTOMER
RELATIONSHIP
STRUCTURE
1.0 Objectives
1.1 Introduction
1.2 Requirements to be Called a Bank
1.3 Banker-Customer Relationship
1.3.1 Introduction
1.3.2 Who is a Customer?
1.3.3 Debtor-Creditor
1.3.4 Creditor-Debtor
1.4 Bank as a Trustee
1.5 Bailee-Bailor Relationship
1.6 Agent-Principal Relationship
1.7 Lessor and Lessee
1.8 Indemnifier and Indemnified
1.8.1 Banker Customer Relationship Summarised
1.9 Different Deposit Products or Services
1.9.1 Deposit Products
1.9.2 Demand Deposits
1.9.3 Time Deposits
1.9.4 Hybrid Deposits or Flexi Deposits
1.9.5 Deposit Products for Non Resident Indians
1.10 Services to Customers and Investors
1.10.1 Merchant Banking
1.10.2 Lease Financing
1.10.3 Plastic Money
1.10.4 Electronic Cards/ Payment Services
1.10.5 Remittance Services
1.10.6 Government Schemes
1.10.7 Third Party Products Sale
1.10.8 Safe Custody or Trusteeship Services
1.11 Let Us Sum Up
1.12 Keywords
1.13 Check Your Progress
1.14 Answers to ‘Check Your Progress’

=== PAGE 21 ===
4 | PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES OF BANKING
1.0 OBJECTIVES
After reading this Unit, you will:
• Know the requirements of a bank
• Understand various types of relationship between a bank and its customer
• Know different types of deposit products and services
• Know various types of services banks offer to customers and investors
1.1 INTRODUCTION
The basic function of a banker is accepting money from the public by way of deposits and deploying the
same by means of loans and investments. Besides, bankers render a variety of services, like providing
lockers, keeping articles in safe custody, collecting bills, cheques, etc. Different types of relationships
are created between the banker and the customers, depending upon the nature of service rendered.
1.2 REQUIREMENTS TO BE CALLED A BANK
As per Sec. 5(b) of ‘the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (BR Act)’, the term ‘Banking’ means accepting
for the purpose of lending or investment, deposits of money from the public, repayable on demand or
otherwise and withdrawable by cheque, draft, order or otherwise. Hence, the banker is in the business of
accepting deposits from the public and utilising these for the purpose of lending or investment.
Thus essentials to satisfy the requirements of the definition are:
(a) Deposits should be only for lending and investment. Companies accepting deposits for trading or
manufacturing are not considered as a bank.
(b) The deposit should be from the public. So, ‘Nidhis’ multi-benefit societies, co-operative societies
that accept deposit from their members are not covered as a bank.
(c) Acceptance of deposit should be in the form of money.
A company incorporated under Indian Companies Act, 1956 or Companies Act, 2013 can be a bank, a
banker or a banking company. Under Sec. 5(c) of BR Act, ‘Banking Company’ means any company that
transacts the business of banking in India. Sec. 7(1) of BR Act prohibits use of the words ‘banker’ or
‘banking’ or ‘banking company’ by a company other than a banking company. Sec. 7(2) further prohibits
the use of such words by an individual or a group of individuals or a firm.
(a) Moneylenders are not bankers: The definition of banker does not include the moneylenders or
mahajans, Sahukars or Shettys, because they run their business as individuals or groups of individuals
and not as a company registered under the provisions of the Companies Act and BR Act. In the case
of Kadiresan Chettiar vs. Ramanathan Chettiar (AIR 1927, Madras 438), it was held that while a
moneylender lends his own money, a banker lends money of his customers/depositors.
(b) Accepting deposits of money from the public: Every institution carrying out the business of banking
must accept the deposits of money from the public and should not confine to the deposits from its
members only. In the case entitled Mahalaxmi Bank Limited vs. Registrar of Companies, it was
decided that if a company gave loan to the public but did not accept deposits from the public, it could
not be considered as a banking company under Sec. 5 of BR Act.
(c) Acceptance for the purpose of lending or investment: An institution accepting deposits of money
without any purpose or with a purpose other than lending or investment cannot be termed as a bank.
(d) Deposit repayable to depositors on demand or otherwise: Deposits of money may be repayable either
on demand or if they are term deposits, on the expiry of the stipulated term or period.

=== PAGE 22 ===
BANKER-CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIP | 5
(e) The deposits may be withdrawable by the customers by cheque, draft, order or otherwise.
Banks are also authorised to carry out certain other transactions as provided under Sec.6 of BR Act,
1949, mainly:
(a) Discounting of bills; (b) Collection of cheques and bills; (c) Remittances; (d) Safe custody of articles;
(e) Hiring safe deposit lockers; (f) Conducting foreign exchange transactions; (g) Conducting (Central/
State) government transactions; (h) Issuing letters of credit and guarantees.
Besides, banks now a days also undertake following activities:
(i) Wealth Management services; (ii) Project appraisal; (iii) Sale of third party products such as Mutual
funds, Life insurance, General insurance; (iv) Executor Trustee services; (v) Acceptance of Central and
State Govt. Taxes; (vi) Franking of Stamp duty on documents; (vii) Securities Trading; (viii) Factoring;
(ix) Venture Capital financing; (x) Demat services.
1.3 BANKER-CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIP
1.3.1 Introduction
The relationship between a banker and a customer depends upon the nature of services provided by the
banker.
1.3.2 Who is a Customer?
Before we understand the banker customer relationship it is necessary to know who is called as a customer.
The term ‘customer’ of a bank is not defined by law. Ordinarily, a person who has an account in a bank
is considered as a customer. The legal judgments in the past, however, used to qualify this statement by
laying emphasis on the period for which an account had actually been maintained with the bank.
In Sir John Paget’s view “to constitute a customer there must be some recognizable course or habit of
dealing in the nature of regular banking business.” This definition of a customer of a bank lays emphasis
on the duration of the dealings between the banker and the customer and is, therefore, called the ‘duration
theory’. According to this viewpoint a person does not become a customer of the bank on the opening of
an account; he must have been accustomed to deal with the banker before he is designated as a customer.
The emphasis on the duration of the bank account is now discarded. According to Dr. Hart, “a customer
is one who has an account with a banker or for whom a banker habitually undertakes to act as such.”
Kerala High Court observed in the case of Central Bank of India Ltd. Bombay vs. V.Gopinathan Nair
and others (A.I.R., 1979, Kerala 74): “Broadly speaking, a customer is a person who has the habit of
resorting to the same place or person to do business. So far as banking transactions are concerned he is a
person whose money has been accepted on the footing that banker will honour up to the amount standing
to his credit, irrespective of his connection being of short or long standing.”
For the purpose of KYC requirements, a ‘Customer’ is defined as:
• A person or entity that maintains an account and/or has a business relationship with the bank or
conducts a transaction with the bank
• One on whose behalf the account is maintained or a transaction is conducted (i.e. the beneficial
owner). [Ref: Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 Sec. 2(fa) – “‘Beneficial Owner’ means
an individual who ultimately owns or controls a client of a reporting entity or the person on whose
behalf a transaction is being conducted and includes a person who exercises ultimate effective control
over a juridical person”]

=== PAGE 23 ===
6 | PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES OF BANKING
• Beneficiaries of transactions conducted by professional intermediaries, such as Stock Brokers,
Chartered Accountants, Solicitors etc. as permitted under the law, and
• Any person or entity connected with a financial transaction which can pose significant reputational
or other risks to the bank, say, a wire transfer or issue of a high value demand draft as a single
transaction.
As per the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2022, “client” means a person who is engaged in a
financial transaction or activity with a reporting entity and includes a person on whose behalf the person
who engaged in the transaction or activity, is acting. A customer of a bank need not necessarily be a natural
person. A firm, joint stock company, a society or any separate legal entity (like a partnership firm or an
association of persons) may be a customer. Explanation to Sec. 45-Z of BR Act clarifies that “customer”
includes a Government department and a corporation incorporated by or under any law.
Since the banker-customer relationship is contractual, it follows that any person who is competent to
contract can open a deposit account with a bank branch of his/her choice and convenience.
1.3.3 Debtor-Creditor (Bank is a Debtor and Customer is a Creditor)
When a customer deposits money with his bank, the customer becomes a lender and the bank becomes
a borrower. The money handed over to the bank is a debt. The relationship between the banker and the
customer is that of a debtor and a creditor. The main features of this relationship are:
(a) The bank is free to use the money in a way most beneficial to it.
(b) The customer should make a demand of payment. The banker is not required to pay voluntarily.
(c) The demand should be made in specified manner, in writing by cheque, draft, withdrawal form, order
or otherwise, during working hours.
(d) The creditor (customer) does not have any security from the debtor (bank).
(e) The law of limitation does not begin to run until a demand has been made for repayment, in case of
both demand and fixed deposits.
1.3.4 Creditor-Debtor (Bank is a Creditor and Customer is a Debtor)
When the bank lends money to the customer, the customer is the borrower (i.e. a debtor) and the bank
is the lender (i.e. a creditor). Lending money is the most important activity of a bank. The resources
mobilized by banks are utilized for lending operations. Customer, who borrows money from the bank,
owes money to the bank. In the case of any loan/advance account, the banker is the creditor and the
customer is the debtor or the borrower. The borrower executes documents and offers security to the bank
before utilizing the credit facility.
In addition to these two activities, banks also undertake other activities mentioned in Sec.6 of the Banking
Regulation Act. Depending upon the type of services rendered and the nature of the transaction, the banker
acts as a bailee, trustee, principal, agent, lessor, custodian, etc.
1.4 BANK AS A TRUSTEE
A trustee is a person or firm that holds and administers property or assets for the benefit of a third
party. Trustees are required to make decisions in the beneficiary’s best interests and have a fiduciary
responsibility to them, meaning they act in the best interests of the beneficiaries to manage their assets.
If a customer keeps certain valuables or securities with the bank for safe-keeping or deposits a certain

=== PAGE 24 ===
BANKER-CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIP | 7
amount of money for a specific purpose, the banker, besides becoming a bailee, is also a trustee. In the
case of Subramanyan Pillai and Others vs. Palai Central Bank Ltd. (AIR 1962 Ker. 210), certain persons
deposited `2,000 each in the bank as guarantee money to purchase cars. The bank failed before they
could get the vehicle. The court was of the view that the bank acted as a trustee and the money should
be refunded as preferential debts.
In one case, a customer remitted money for purchase of shares of a company. The bank bought shares
in parts, but before completing the rest of the purchase, it failed. It was held that the bank stood in the
position of a trustee, and the remitter was entitled to the refund of the unspent amount.
1.5 BAILEE-BAILOR RELATIONSHIP (BANK-BAILEE AND CUSTOMER-BAILOR)
When a customer deposits certain valuables, bonds, securities or other documents with the bank, for
their safe custody, the bank, besides becoming a trustee as discussed earlier, also becomes a bailee and
the customer is the bailor. According to the terms of Sec. 148 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, the bank
becomes custodian of the securities of the customer and hence as a bailee is liable for any loss caused to
the bailor due to its negligence. The finder of lost goods (Sec. 71 Indian Contract Act) should return any
increase in goods/animals to the true owner. Under Section 164 (Indian Contract Act), the finder has to
take care of such goods as an ordinary prudent man. These are examples of bailee-bailor relationship.
1.6 AGENT-PRINCIPAL RELATIONSHIP (BANK IS AGENT AND CUSTOMER IS
PRINCIPAL)
According to Section 182, of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, a principal is a person who delegates authority
to another person namely, the agent. Among the ancillary services rendered by the bank are remittance,
collection of cheques, bills, to pay regularly, electricity bills, telephone bills, insurance premium, club
fees, etc. on behalf of the customers. In these cases, the bank acts as an agent, his principal being the
customer. The relationship of agency, terminates on the death, insolvency and lunacy of the customer or
on completion of the work assigned. In case of remittances, though the relation is of agency in the case
of Traders Bank Ltd vs. S. Kalyan Singh (AIR 1953), Punb p. 195, the High Court has held the relation
to be that of debtor-creditor.
1.7 LESSOR AND LESSEE (BANK AS A LESSOR AND CUSTOMER AS A LESSEE)
Section 105 of ‘Transfer of Property Act’ deals with lease, lesser, lessee. The banks provide safe deposit
lockers to the customers for use on lease basis. The relationship here is that of lessor and lessee or of
licensor and licensee. The bank shall not be liable for any damage and/or loss of contents of locker arising
from natural calamities or Acts of God like earthquake, floods, lightning and thunderstorm or any act
that is attributable to the sole fault or negligence of the customer. Banks shall, exercise appropriate care
for protection of their locker systems and premises. It has the responsibility to ensure that incidents like
fire, theft/burglary/ robbery, dacoity, building collapse do not occur in the bank’s premises due to its own
shortcomings, negligence and by any act of omission/commission. In instances where loss of contents of
locker is due to such incidents or attributable to fraud committed by its employee(s), the banks’ liability
shall be for an amount equivalent to one hundred times the prevailing annual rent of the safe deposit locker.

=== PAGE 25 ===
8 | PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES OF BANKING
1.8 INDEMNIFIER AND INDEMNIFIED (BANK IS INDEMNIFIED
OR INDEMNITY HOLDER AND CUSTOMER IS INDEMNIFIER)
A contract by which one party promises to save the other from loss caused to him by the conduct of the
promisor himself or the conduct of any other person is a contract of indemnity – Sec. 124 (Indian Contract
Act, 1872). In banking, such relationship occurs in transactions of issue of duplicate demand draft, fixed
deposit receipt etc. In these cases the person availing the facility will compensate the other for any loss
arising from the wrong/excess payment.
1.8.1 Banker Customer Relationship Summarised
The banker – customer relationships are summarized below for different types of transactions.
Transaction Bank Customer
Deposit in the bank Debtor Creditor
Loan from bank Creditor Debtor
Safe custody Bailee Bailor
Locker Lessor Lessee
Collection of Cheque Agent Principal
Purchase of a draft* Debtor Creditor
Payee of a draft Trustee Beneficiary
Pledge Pawner (Pledgee) Pawnee (Pledger)
Mortgage Mortgagee Mortgagor
Standing instruction Agent Principal
Sale/purchase of securities on behalf of a customer Agent Principal
Money deposited but instructions not given for its disposal Trustee Beneficiary
Articles left by mistake Trustee Beneficiary
Shares given for sale Agent Principal
Hypothecation Hypothecatee Hypothecator
*As per Haryana and Punjab High court judgment in the case of Traders Banks vs. Kalyan Singh- 1953
1.9 DIFFERENT DEPOSIT PRODUCTS OR SERVICES
1.9.1 Deposit Products
Deposit products consist of a wide variety of financial products whereby, clients deliver (deposit) funds
(in cash or digitally) with a financial institution and may earn a financial return depending on the deposit
type and duration. Let us know the different types of deposit products offered by banks. Detailed features
of various deposit products are discussed in Unit 5.
Types of Deposits
Deposits are normally classified as demand deposits and time deposits.

=== PAGE 26 ===
BANKER-CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIP | 9
Demand Deposits Time Deposits
1. Payable on Demand. 1. Repaid after expiry of the Deposit Period.
2. Low interest rates or no interest. 2. High interest rates, which vary according to period.
3. It includes current, savings, overdue deposits and
unclaimed deposits.
3. Time deposits are for a period ranging from 7 days
to 120 months period with or without reinvestment
plans.
1.9.2 Demand Deposits
Demand deposits are classified into current accounts and savings accounts.
Current Deposits: The deposis in current account are working funds of businesses or enter; rises, and
fluctuate widely and are not paid any interest.
Saving Deposits: Savings accounts are to inculcate savings habit and facilitate regular transactions through
banking system, and attract interest. These fluctuate, albeit are less volatile.
1.9.3 Time Deposits
Term deposits (TD) are for investing surplus funds for short to long term. TD can have distinguishing
features for following parameters:
(i) Mode of interest payment – Periodical or cumulative.
(ii) Mode of investment – in lump sum or in instalment.
(iii) Mode of return of principal – on maturity or in instalment.
TDs are of several types as indicated below:
(i) Fixed Deposits (periodical interest payment)
(ii) Short-term Deposits (of less than a year)
(iii) Reinvestment Deposit Scheme (cumulative interest paid on maturity)
(iv) Recurring Deposit Scheme (periodical deposits made)
(v) Flexi Recurring Deposit (special type of recurring deposit)
1.9.4 Hybrid Deposits or Flexi Deposits
These are a combination of demand and fixed deposits, introduced giving flexibility to customer.
1.9.5 Deposit Products for Non-Resident Indians
Banks also offer special deposit accounts/ schemes for Non Resident Indians, Persons of Indian Origins,
and Overseas Citizens of India.
• Non-Resident Ordinary Rupee Account (NRO Account)
• Non-Resident (External) Rupee Account (NRE Account)
• Foreign Currency Non Resident (Bank) Account – FCNR (B) Account
1.10 SERVICES TO CUSTOMERS AND INVESTORS
Banks also provide certain other financial services to meet other needs of customers and investors. These
services help in augmenting revenue earnings for the banks.

=== PAGE 27 ===
10 | PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES OF BANKING
1.10.1 Merchant Banking
Merchant bankers are financial intermediaries facilitating transfer of capital from those who own it
(Investor or Bond Subscriber) to those who use it (Corporates or Governments). They help a corporate
in Initial Public Offering (IPO) or a Follow-up Public Offer (FPO), popularly called a Public issue or
Private Placement of Debt or Equity.
Merchant bankers assist in introducing or selecting or appointing outside technical consultants in addition
to in-house technical personnel for preparation of a detailed project report, market survey report, feasibility
studies etc. It also assists in:
(a) Obtaining regulatory clearances from Securities Exchange Board of India (SEBI), the stock exchanges
(BSE, NSE), Registrar of Companies etc.
(b) Specifically obtaining clearances from SEBI for the prospectus of the IPO or the FPO.
(c) Planning and timing of the IPO/FPO.
(d) Underwriting of public issue by financial institutions or brokers.
(e) Selection of Principal Broker(s) and Sub-Brokers, lead-book-runners and sub-book runners.
(f) Selecting the Registrar to the issue and fixing their remuneration.
(g) Selecting bankers to the issue that will maintain the bank account for collecting and holding the
funds to be raised till successful closure of the issue.
(h) Selecting advertising consultants or agencies for publicity campaigns, investor conferences, analyst
conferences and road shows.
(i) Printing and distribution of prospectus/ application forms to brokers/ sub-brokers/book runners.
(j) Making application to stock exchanges for listing of the security.
(k) Monitoring and reporting the progress of the offering to the company and regulatory bodies.
1.10.2 Lease Financing
This means leasing out the capital assets owned by an institution to another company against payment
of monthly rents for asset’s consumption or use. Here, the finance is provided by the institution (may be
a bank too), called Lessor, which does not enjoy the use of asset but is its owner. The lessor is entitled
to write off a certain amount of capital cost (i.e. in the form of depreciation charge on the capital asset)
against its taxable profits until it is fully written off. While the lessee is benefited by not investing funds
in capital cost, the lease charges are permitted to account as revenue expenses in its books of accounts.
The lease can also be arranged on any existing freehold asset(s) or long leasehold property by either
mortgaging it or by selling it at market price to a leasing company; this leasing company in turn would
lease it back to the seller of the asset on lease thus benefiting both the entities. In a lease, the lessee of
the equipment does not become the owner thereof.
Advantages to Lessee
(a) Use of asset without incurring the capital cost, thus saving on cost of capital.
(b) Lease rentals are business revenue expense, contracting profits and reducing taxation.
(c) Since there is no capital cost, this does not impact the liability side of the balance sheet.
(d) Credit worthiness of the lessee is maintained at a higher level facilitating it to borrow further.
Disadvantages to Lessee
(a) Ownership of the asset is held with the lessor and not with the lessee.
(b) The asset is permitted to be used for agreed business purposes only; preventing from utilising the
asset for alternative business purposes, if any.

=== PAGE 28 ===
BANKER-CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIP | 11
(c) Confiscation or repossession of the asset by the lessor on breach of terms and conditions.
(d) If the lessor/owner becomes insolvent or goes into liquidation the asset may be attached by the
liquidator.
1.10.3 Plastic Money
Plastic money in the form of credit cards and other types of cards has become a preferred mode of
payments. Increasing use of the plastic money, has reduced the need of cash to a significant extent.
(i) Charge Cards
A charge card is an electronic payment card, where the cardholder is not charged interest but needs the
user to pay the balance due in full upon receipt of the statement, usually every month. Holders of these
cards may have to pay a high annual fee. There are very few issuers of charge cards. Charge cards usually
do not have a preset spending limit and the amount allowed to be drawn varies depending on the usage
and payment record built up. There are no charges levied on the amount spent apart from the annual fee.
Late fee is charged on delayed payments.
(ii) Credit Cards
Credit card facilitates the card holder to utilize sanctioned credit limit primarily for making purchases
of goods and services. The difference between a credit card and a charge card is that in case of charge
card, the entire outstanding amount is to be paid within the specified period. In case of credit cards, the
cardholder has the option to pay only part amount on due date.
(iii) Debit Cards
Debit cards are similar to credit cards in functionalities, except that the transaction amount is debited to
the cardholder’s account as soon as it is notified to the issuer. Hence it is an instrument facilitating debit
to a savings or current account.
(iv) ATM Cards
These are cards issued to the savings/ current account holders for drawing cash from Automated Teller
Machines (ATMs) located in the branch or off site. Usually debit cards are also used as ATM cards.
(v) Prepaid Cards
Prepaid cards are loaded with the amount paid by the persons purchasing the cards. These cards can be
given to third persons who can use these for making purchases from merchants. Some cards can also be
used for withdrawing cash from ATMs.
(vi) Co-branded Cards
A co-branded card is a credit card that a retailer of consumer goods or services issues in partnership
with a particular credit card issuer or network. Often bearing the logos of both the credit card company
and the retailer, co-branded cards earn merchandise discounts, points, or other rewards when used with
the sponsoring merchant, but they can also be used anywhere the cards from that network are accepted.
1.10.4 Electronic Cards/Payment services
As the financial services sector has become technology based and smart phones have become widely
prevalent, electronic payment instruments have been introduced. These instruments can be loaded on the
smartphones of the customers, like mobile wallet, etc. Various cards are now issued in electronic form also.

=== PAGE 29 ===
12 | PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES OF BANKING
1.10.5 Remittance Services
For facilitating funds transfers between two persons, banks were providing services in the form of Demand
Drafts (DD), Banker’s Cheques (BC)/ Pay Orders (PO), Mail Transfers (MT) and Telegraphic Transfers
(TT). With adoption of core banking system for bank operations, these products have become redundant.
Transfer products have become technology as stated below:
• National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT)
• Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)
• Immediate Payment Service (IMPS)
• Unified Payment Interface (UPI) Transfers
• Aadhaar Enabled Payment System (AePS)
• National Automated Clearing House (NACH)
1.10.6 Government Schemes
Banks also serve as the distribution points for several Government Schemes that are aimed at financial
inclusion and also providing safe avenues of investment to the common man. Some of the prominent
schemes are mentioned below. These products provide commission income to banks, apart from facilitating
them to cater to various needs of their customers under one roof.
• Public Provident Fund (PPF)
• National Pension Scheme (NPS)
• Capital Gains Account Scheme 1988 (CGAS)
• Senior Citizens Savings Scheme (SCSS)
• Sukanya Samriddhi Account Scheme, 2019
• RBI Bonds
• Gold Monetisation Scheme, 2015
• Sovereign Gold Bond Scheme (SGB)
• Nominated Agency for Gold Imports
• Atal Pension Yojana
• Pradhan Mantri Vaya Vandana Yojana (PMVVY)
• Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana (PMSBY)
• Stand Up India Scheme
• Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana
1.10.7 Third Party Products Sale
With a view to providing one-stop-services to their customers, banks have tapped the opportunity made
available through regulatory relaxations for banks to sell third party financial products pertaining mainly
to the capital market and insurance sectors. For banks, it is an additional source of revenue. Customers,
get financial services at one place. For capital market and insurance sector, it adds to their depth. Some
of the major third party products are:
(i) Demat Accounts: Tie-up with a Depository Participant (DP). Some banks register as a DP.
(ii) Trading Account: Tie-up with a Stock Broker.
(iii) Three-in-One Account: Linked Demat Account - Trading Account - Savings/ Current Account.
(iv) Mutal Funds: Tie-up with various mutual fund companies.
(v) Life Insurance Policy: Tie-up with a life insurance company.

=== PAGE 30 ===
BANKER-CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIP | 13
(vi) Health Insurance Policy: Tie-up with a health insurance company.
(vii) Vehicle Insurance, House Insurance, etc.: Tie-up with a general insurance company.
1.10.8 Safe Custody or Trusteeship Services
Banks and bankers enjoy tremendous public trust. Banks have therefore offered certain services that
leverages on this public confidence. Certain services that banks provide in this context are as follows:
(i) Safe Custody of articles, documents, etc.: Valuable articles/ documents are left in the custody of
banks for safekeeping.
(ii) Hiring out safe deposit lockers: Banks hire out safe deposit lockers for safe keeping of valuables
(ornaments, gold, documents, etc).
(iii) Escrow account: Such accounts are used when a party wants to exercise some control on the use
of the funds received in the account in the name of another party.
(iv) Escrow services for document: There are situations when certain parties to a transaction want to
have joint control of a document until certain conditions are fulfilled.
(v) Trusteeship: Banks offer trusteeship services for handling of certain funds or assets.
(vi) Executorship: Banks offer the services of executorship for the wills made by their customers.
1.11 LET US SUM UP
The term ‘Banking’ has been comprehensively defined under BR Act. The banker is engaged in the
business of accepting the deposits from the public and utilizing such deposits for lending or investment.
The Act specifies the criteria to be fulfilled for being termed as ‘Bank’.
The term ‘customer’ of a bank is not defined by law. Ordinarily, a person who has an account in a bank
is considered as a customer. For the purpose of KYC policy, a ‘Customer’ is defined as a person or entity
that maintains an account and/or has a business relationship with the bank.
Banks are also authorised to carry out other transactions as provided under Sec. 6 of BR Act. These
services provided by banks to customers give rise to certain relationship between them. The general view
is that the banker’s relationship with the depositor is that of a debtor and a creditor. Other relationships
are of: creditor - debtor, bailee - bailor, and trustee - beneficiary.
Deposits are either demand deposits or time deposits. Demand deposits are made up of current accounts
and saving accounts, while time deposits include fixed deposits, short-term deposits, recurring deposits,
MIDS/QIDS/reinvestment deposits, etc.
Other services provided by banks are merchant banking, lease financing, plastic money like credit or
debit cards, etc.
Remittance services have been a major activity of banks since their inception. New-age remittance
products are NEFT, RTGS, IMPS, and AEPS that are available on 24 x 7 basis.
Banks also administer and manage accounts under certain Government Schemes, especially those under
Small Savings Schemes.
Banks also support Central Government measures to mobilise stock of gold with public through various
schemes.
Banks are offering third party financial products like insurance products, mutual funds, stock trading
account, demat account, and three-in-one accounts.

=== PAGE 31 ===
14 | PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES OF BANKING
Banks also offer safe custody services and safe deposit vaults for safekeeping of valuable articles and
documents. Banks also act as escrow agent (for funds and documents), trustee for assets, executors for
estate.
1.12 KEYWORDS
Creditor, Debtor, Bailor, Bailee, Lessor, Lessee, Trustee, Principal, Indemnifier, Indemnified, Demand
Deposits, Time Deposits, Hybrid Deposits, Tax Deduction at Source (TDS), Recurring Deposits, Merchant
Banking, Initial Public Offering (IPO), Public Issue, Underwriting, Listing of Shares, Lease Financing,
Credit Card, Debit Card, ATM Card, Pre-paid card, NEFT, RTGS, IMPS, AePS, NPS, SCSS, Gold
Monetisation Scheme , Sovereign Gold Bond, Three-in-one account.
1.13 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. Principal function(s) of banks is/are ________.
(a) accepting deposits (b) lending and investing
(c) non-fund business and remittance services (d) all of above (a) to (c)
(e) only (a) and (b).
2. When a bank lends money to the corporate person the relationship between them is of ________.
(a) borrower and lender (b) creditor-debtor
(c) debtor-creditor (d) customer and client
3. What relationship is created when the bank collects a cheque in clearing?
(a) holder for value (b) clearing member and principal
(c) agent and principal (d) collecting bank and holder
(e) none of above
4. Demand deposits are those which can be withdrawn ________.
(a) on request (b) on sanction by Manager
(c) on demand (d) on persuasion
5. Merchant bankers are ________.
(a) financial brokers (b) financial intermediaries
(c) credit appraisers (d) underwriters
(e) All of the above.
1.14 ANSWERS TO ‘CHECK YOUR PROGRESS’
1. (d), 2. (b), 3. (c), 4. (c), 5. (b).
(Sources: Banking Regulation Act, RBI Circulars, Websites of various banks and NPCI)

=== PAGE 32 ===
STRUCTURE
2.0 Objectives
2.1 Money Laundering & Financing of Terrorism Risks
2.1.1 Introduction
2.1.2 Stages of Money Laundering
2.1.3 Stages of Financing of Terrorism
2.1.4 Objectives of Prevention of Money Laundering
2.2 AML Framework in India
2.2.1 Money Laundering Offence
2.2.2 Money Laundering – Risk Perception
2.2.3 Measures to Mitigate Money Laundering Risk
2.3 Know Your Customer Policy
2.3.1 Practice of Introduction
2.3.2 ‘Customer’ Definition: KYC Norms
2.3.3 Key Elements of Know Your Customer (KYC) Policy
2.4 Organisational Set-up for AML
2.5 Obligations under PMLA
2.6 Risk Management
2.7 Obligations under International Agreements
2.8 FATF Identified Jurisdictions
2.9 Correspondent Banks
2.10 Reporting Under FATCA/ CRS
2.11 Reporting Obligations
2.12 Implications of Non-compliance of PMLA Obligations
2.13 Secrecy Obligations
2.14 Let Us Sum Up
2.15 Keywords
2.16 Check Your Progress
2.17 Answers to ‘Check Your Progress’
U N I T
2 AML-KYC GUIDELINES

=== PAGE 33 ===
16 | PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES OF BANKING
2.0 OBJECTIVES
After studying this Unit, you will:
• Understand the ‘Money Laundering’ and ‘Financing of Terrorism’ concepts
• Know about the purpose of KYC Policy and its elements
• Know about the obligations of banks under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act
2.1 MONEY LAUNDERING & FINANCING OF TERRORISM RISKS
2.1.1 Introduction
Money laundering (ML) is a process whereby the origin of funds generated from criminal activities (drug
trafficking, gun smuggling, corruption etc.) is concealed and these funds are infused in the financial
system appearing as if these originated from legitimate sources. Often such funds are deployed in legal
activities or in legitimate assets.
Corruption, tax evasion, Ponzi schemes, other financial crimes, cybercrimes are closely connected with
money laundering. Funds from these crimes now form a substantial portion of money laundering funds.
Financial crimes (FC) now constitute a significant part of criminal activities.
Third component of the triad today is Terrorist financing (TF). With growth of several terrorist
organisations, big and small, Terrorist financing has assumed large proportions. Terrorist financing has
developed linkages with money laundering as for both purposes similar modalities are used.
Thus ML, TF and FC are interconnected. Another aspect is that certain criminals have organized into
Organised Crime Groups (OCGs) and Professional Money Launderers (PMLs). OCGs and PMLs together
form the network that propagates criminal activities and launders the funds generated from such activities.
Financial Action Task Force (FATF), a global organization, was set up for evolving measures to be taken
by financial sector businesses and certain non-financial businesses and professions for prevention of
money laundering. FATF issued certain recommendations that serve as anti-money laundering (AML)
and combating financing of terrorism (CFT), and are known as FATF Standards 2012. Money laundering
and terrorism financing are considered as criminal activities across the world.
2.1.2 Stages of Money Laundering
Funds from criminal activities are typically generated outside the financial system, and are placed in it
to give them legal form. This money laundering cycle comprises three stages stated below.
(a) Placement: In this stage the funds from criminal activity are introduced into the financial system.
Typically, this is done through deposits in multiple bank accounts.
(b) Layering: Next, those funds are passed through numerous financial transactions in these accounts
creating several layers of funds transfers. This helps in hiding the source of these funds.
(c) Integration: Next step is collecting the funds lying in multiple accounts in one or few accounts
that are then deployed for investing in some legal business activity or for acquiring some asset in
legitimate manner.

=== PAGE 34 ===
AML-KYC GUIDELINES | 17
2.1.3 Stages of Financing of Terrorism
There are numerous terrorist outfits, in the world. These have financial cycles similar to commercial
entities, and use banks and financial institutions. Financing of Terrorism comprises following stages:
(a) Raising: Terrorist organisations source funds from their sympathisers both individuals and
organisations. Sometimes, terrorist outfits also engage in various income generating activities, legal
or criminal. Channeling funds from both such sources is done in a clandestine manner so that the
purpose for which these are collected is not known.
(b) Moving: Contributors to the terrorist organisations can be located anywhere not only in their home
country but across the world. These funds are therefore required to be moved to the places of their
establishments of the terrorist organisations.
(c) Storing: As the funds raised may be deployed for terrorism related activities including the regular
activities for running the outfits with a gap of time and spread over a period, these are parked in the
interim in bank accounts or any other financial investment.
(d) Using: Finally, the raised funds are used for the purposes of carrying out the terrorism act or for
various organisational related activities.
2.1.4 Objectives of Prevention of Money Laundering
The main objectives of measures for prevention of money laundering are:
(a) To prevent criminal elements from using the financial system for money laundering activities.
(b) To prevent spread of criminal activities in society.
(c) To safeguard the economy from financial crimes.
(d) To prevent terrorists from gaining access to financial resources.
2.2 AML FRAMEWORK IN INDIA
Based on FATF Recommendations, in India Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA) was
enacted under which, inter alia, few obligations for all financial sector players and certain non-finance
businesses have also been stipulated. These entities in the financial sector and the designated businesses
in non-financial sector are termed as Reporting Entities (RE). Detailed legal provisions for REs, have
been included in Prevention of Money Laundering (Maintenance of Records) Rules (PMLR).
Besides, specific institutional framework has also been put in place for dealing with money laundering
crime.
(i) Financial Intelligence Unit-India (FIU-Ind) has been set up for receiving information about various
financial transactions from certain businesses, including banks and financial institutions. FIU-India
also has supervisory powers over the business entities that are subject to PMLA.
(ii) Enforcement Directorate (ED) is the investigation and prosecuting authority for money laundering
crime. The powers of ED include tracking and attaching assets related to money laundering.
(iii) Special Courts are set up for adjudication of cases pertaining to money laundering crime. The
adjudicating authority has powers to freeze the assets and even confiscate the assets proved to be
related to money laundering.
(iv) The Regulators of various business activities, covered under PMLA, issue operating instructions
and guidelines for the businesses regulated by them for discharging their obligations under the
PMLA and PMLR.

=== PAGE 35 ===
18 | PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES OF BANKING
2.2.1 Money Laundering Offence
The offence of money laundering has been defined in Sec. 3 of the PMLA as:
“whosoever directly or indirectly attempts to indulge or knowingly assists or knowingly is a party
or is actually involved in any process or activity connected with the proceeds of crime including
its concealment, possession, acquisition or use and projecting or claiming it as untainted property
shall be guilty of offence of money laundering.”
Sec. 45 of PMLA stipulates that all offences under the PMLA are to be deemed to be cognizable and
non-bailable offences.
Sec. 4 of PMLA stipulates the punishment for money laundering offence, which is rigorous imprisonment
for not less than 3 years but up to 7 years and fine as per the gravity of the offence. In cases connected
with offences under the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act the imprisonment may extend
up to maximum 10 years.
2.2.2 Money Laundering – Risk Perception
Financial products and services are designed to provide quick, convenient and efficient modes for dealing
with funds for different purposes. These are abused by the criminals for money laundering and financing
of terrorism, by disguising or misrepresenting their true identities, profiles and purposes.
For example, for a salaried executive a savings account is a basic banking product that is used by her for
managing her regular inflows and outflows of funds related to her livelihood and living needs. A criminal
engaged in running a gambling racket, on the other hand, opens a savings account for dealing with betting
money received from the customers. However, the criminal poses as a freelancer photographer to disguise
the inflows as earnings from this occupation.
Thus the primary source of ML/FT risks is the customers. These are also affected by:
(i) Nature of products and services
(ii) Country of incorporation of the bank
(iii) Place of the bank branch
(iv) Place(s) with which the transaction is connected.
(v) Nature and value of transaction
2.2.3 Measures to Mitigate Money Laundering Risk
The obligations under PMLA require the banks to mitigate ML/FT risks. Banks are required to take
appropriate measures for the following purposes:
(a) To know/understand the customers and their financial dealings better.
(b) To detect and report suspicious activities to FIU-Ind as per the laid down procedures.
(c) To comply with applicable laws and regulatory guidelines.
(d) To adequately train the staff in KYC/AML procedures.
These make it difficult for criminals to abuse banks for ML/FT as their activities are closely monitored.
They mitigate ML/FT risks as criminals would avoid vigilant banks.
