BOOK: _OceanofPDF.com_Retail_Banking_and_Wealth_Management_-_IIBF.pdf
TOTAL PAGES: 649


=== PAGE 1 ===


=== PAGE 2 ===
RETAIL BANKING &
WEALTH MANAGEMENT

=== PAGE 3 ===
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF BANKING & FINANCE
(ISO 9001:2015 Certified)
Kohinoor City, Commercial-II, Tower-1, 2nd & 3rd Floor,
Kirol Road, Off-L.B.S. Marg, Kurla-West,
Mumbai-400070
Established on 30th April 1928
MISSION
• 	To develop professionally qualified and competent bankers and finance professionals primarily through
a process of education, training, examination, consultancy/counselling and continuing professional
development programs.
VISION
• 	To be the premier Institute for developing and nurturing competent professionals in banking and
finance field.
OBJECTIVES
• 	To facilitate study of theory and practice of banking and finance.
• 	To test and certify attainment of competence in the profession of banking and finance.
• 	To collect, analyse and provide information needed by the professionals in banking and finance.
• 	To promote continuous professional development.
• 	To promote and undertake research relating to Operations, Products, Instruments, Processes, etc.,
in banking and finance and to encourage innovation and creativity among finance professionals so
that they could face competition and succeed.
COMMITTED TO PROFESSIONAL EXCELLENCE
Website: www.iibf.org.in

=== PAGE 4 ===
RETAIL BANKING &
WEALTH MANAGEMENT
(For JAIIB/Diploma in Banking &
Finance Examination)
Indian Institute of Banking & Finance

=== PAGE 5 ===
© INDIAN INSTITUTE OF BANKING & FINANCE, MUMBAI, 2023
(This book has been published by Indian Institute of Banking & Finance. Permission of the Institute is essential for
reproduction of any portion of this book. The views expressed herein are not necessarily the views of the Institute.)
All rights reserved under the copyright act. No part of this publication may be reproduced, transcribed, transmitted,
stored in a retrieval system or translated into any language or computer language, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, magnetic, optical, chemical, manual, photocopy or otherwise without the prior permission of
the copyright owner. Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this publication may be liable to criminal
prosecution and civil claims for damages.
First published 2023
MACMILLAN EDUCATION INDIA PRIVATE LIMITED
Bengaluru Delhi Chennai Kolkata Mumbai Ahmedabad Bhopal
Chandigarh Coimbatore Guwahati Hyderabad Lucknow Madurai
Nagpur Patna Pune Thiruvananthapuram Visakhapatnam Kochi
Bhubaneshwar Noida Sahibabad Hubli
ISBN: 978-93-5666-034-2
Published by Macmillan Education India Private Limited
(formerly Macmillan Publishers India Private Limited),
21, Patullos Road, Chennai 600002, India
“This book is meant for educational and learning purposes. The author(s) of the book has/have taken all reasonable care to ensure that the contents of the
book do not violate any copyright or other intellectual property rights of any person in any manner whatsoever. In the event the author(s) has/have been
unable to track any source and if any copyright has been inadvertently infringed, please notify the publisher in writing for any corrective action.”
RETAIL BANKING & WEALTH MANAGEMENT
First Edition (2023)
Authored, Revised & Updated by Mr. D. P. Srivastava, Retd. DGM, BoB
Vetted by Mr. S. R. Meena, Retd. GM, BOI

=== PAGE 6 ===
FOREWORD
Formal education will make you a living; self-education will make you a fortune.
–Jim Rohn
The banking sector, currently, is experiencing a transformation catalysed by digitalization and information
explosion with the customer as the focal point. Besides, competition from NBFCs, FinTechs, changing
business models, growing importance of risk and compliance have contributed to this radical shift. Such
an ever-evolving ecosystem requires strategic agility and constant upgradation of skill levels on the part
of the Banking & Finance professionals to chart a clear pathway for their professional development.
The mission of the Indian Institute of Banking & Finance is to develop professionally qualified and
competent bankers and finance executives primarily through a process of education, training, examination,
counselling and continuing professional development programs. In line with the Mission, the Institute
has been offering a bouquet of courses and certifications for capacity building of the banking personnel.
The flagship courses/examinations offered by the Institute are the JAIIB, CAIIB and the Diploma in
Banking & Finance (DB&F) which have gained wide recognition among banks and financial institutions.
With banking witnessing tectonic shifts, there was an imperative need to revisit the existing syllabi for
the flagship courses.
The pivotal point for revising the syllabi was to ensure that, in addition to acquiring basic knowledge, the
candidates develop concept-based skills for keeping pace with the developments happening in the financial
ecosystem and to ensure greater value addition to the flagship courses and to make them more practical
and contemporary. This will culminate in creating a rich pool of knowledgeable and competent banking
& finance professionals who are capable of contributing to the sustainable growth of their organizations.
Keeping in view the above objectives, the Institute had constituted a high-level Syllabi Revision
Committee comprising of members from public sector banks, private sector banks, co-operative banks
and academicians. On the basis of the feedback received from various banks and changes suggested by
the Committee, the syllabi of JAIIB & CAIIB have since been finalized.
The revised JAIIB syllabi will now have four compulsory subjects as under:
1. 	Indian Economy & Indian Financial System
2. 	Principles & Practices of Banking
3. 	Accounting & Financial Management for Bankers
4. 	Retail Banking & Wealth Management
The new subject on Indian Economy & Indian Financial System will cover the basics of economics
and financial system prevalent in India. This will familiarise the candidates with the evolving financial
ecosystem of the country.
In so far as the book on Accounting & Financial Management is concerned, two new modules viz Financial
Management and Taxation & Fundamentals of Costing have been introduced. With bankers having to
cater to the requirements of varied industries, it is imperative that they have an underlying understanding
of the relationships between cost accounting, financial accounting, management accounting and financial
management. Some of the other topics that have been covered are Cost of Capital, Equipment Leasing,
GST, Standard Costing, Marginal Costing, Budgetary Control system etc.

=== PAGE 7 ===
The books on Principles & Practices of Banking and Retail Banking & Wealth Management have been
thoroughly revised and updated.
As is the practice followed by the Institute, a dedicated courseware for every paper/subject is published.
The present courseware on Retail Banking and Wealth Management for Bankers has now been authored
in line with the revised syllabus for the subject. The book follows the same modular approach adopted
by the Institute in the earlier editions/publications.
While the Institute is committed to revise and update the courseware from time to time, the book should,
however, not be considered as the only source of information / reading material while preparing for the
examinations due to rapid changes witnessed in all the areas affecting banking & finance. The students
have to keep themselves abreast with the current developments by referring to economic newspapers/
journals, articles, books and Government / Regulators’ publications / websites etc. Questions will be
based on the recent developments related to the syllabus.
Considering that the courseware cannot be published frequently, the Institute will continue the practice
of keeping candidates informed about the latest developments by placing important updates/Master
Circulars/ Master Directions on its website and through publications like IIBF Vision, Bank Quest, etc.
The courseware has been updated with the help of Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) drawn from respective
fields and vetted by practitioners to ensure accuracy and correctness. The Institute acknowledges with
gratitude the valuable contributions rendered by the SMEs in updating/vetting the courseware.
We welcome suggestions for improvement of the courseware.
Mumbai 	Biswa Ketan Das
2023 	Chief Executive Officer
vi | FOREWORD

=== PAGE 8 ===
RECOMMENDED READING
The Institute has prepared comprehensive courseware in the form of study kits to facilitate
preparation for the examination without intervention of the teacher. An attempt has been made to
cover fully the syllabus prescribed for each module/subject and the presentation of topics may not
always be in the same sequence as given in the syllabus.
Candidates are also expected to take note of all the latest developments relating to the subject
covered in the syllabus by referring to Financial Papers, Economic Journals, Latest Books and
Publications in the subjects concerned.

=== PAGE 9 ===


=== PAGE 10 ===
RETAIL BANKING & WEALTH
MANAGEMENT
SYLLABUS
MODULE A: RETAIL BANKING
Retail Banking: Introduction
Characteristics of Retail Banking; Advantages of Retail Banking; Constraints in Retail Banking;
Evolution of Retail Banking; Prerequisite for Success of Retail Banking; Challenges for Retail Banking;
Future of Retail Banking
Retail Banking: Role within the Bank Operations
Business Models
Applicability of Retail Banking Concepts and Distinction between Retail and Corporate/
Wholesale Banking
Applicability of Retail Banking Concepts; Distinction between Retail and Corporate/Wholesale Banking
Branch Profitability
Banking System: An Introduction; Banking in India; What is Profitability; What is Profit; Gross Profit,
Operating Profit and Net Profit; Profit and Profitability in the context of Banking; Traditional Measures
of Profitability; The ROA (Return on Asset); Return on Equity (ROE) for Banks; Branch Operating
Efficiency; Strategies for Improving Efficiencies of Banking Operations; Factors Affecting Profitability
of Banks in India; Profitability Analysis of Bank Branches; Steps to Improve Branch Profitability;
Essential Factors to Make Continuous Improvement in Profitability
MODULE B: RETAIL PRODUCTS AND RECOVERY
Customer Requirements
Maslow’s Theory and Customer Requirements; Customer Requirements about Service Quality; Service
Quality
Product Development Process
Product Development Process; Product Life Cycle; Product Lines of a Banker; Deposit Products or
Liability Products; Credit Products or Asset Products; Other Products and Services; Other Fee Based
Services – Distribution of third party products; New Product Development; Stages in New Product
Development; Constraints in New Product Development; Product Management; Product Policy

=== PAGE 11 ===
Credit Scoring
What is a Credit Score?; Evolution of Credit Scoring; What’s a Good Credit Score?; Credit Scoring
Model; Managing the Credit Score; Positive Side of Credit Score; Warning Signs in Credit Score; Credit
Information Companies in India; Issues in Credit Scoring; Mistakes in Credit Scoring; Troubleshooting
Credit Score
Important Retail Liability Products
Demand Deposits : An Introduction; Current Deposit: An Introduction; Main features of Current Deposit
Account; Advantage of Current Deposit Account; Documents required for opening various types of
Current Accounts; Opening of Current Account; Operational Instructions in Current Account; Transfer of
Accounts; Inoperative Accounts; Closure of Current Account; Savings Bank Account: An Introduction;
Advantages and Importance of Savings Bank Deposits to Customers; Who Can Open a Savings Bank
Account?; Deregulation of interest in Savings Deposit Account; Maintenance of Balance in Savings
Bank Account and Interest Payment; Restrictions on Transactions in SB Account; Services offered in
Savings Bank Accounts; Time Deposit – An Introduction; Periodicity of Time Deposit; Operational
instructions; Interest on Fixed Deposit; Term Deposit accounts of minors; Premature Payment of FD;
Operational Issues of FD; Advances Against Bank’s own Time Deposit Receipts; Renewal of FD;
Recent Rule of RBI on overdue FD; Form 15 G/ 15 H; Deposit of TDS to Income Tax Department by
Banks; 2 in 1 Account; Recurring Deposit (RD)
Important Retail Asset Products
Home Loans; Housing Loan under Prime Minister’s Awas Yojana (PMAY); Home Improvement Loans;
Home Decor Loans; Auto/Vehicle Loans; Personal Loans; Educational Loans; Other Retail Loans;
Processing of Retail Loans
Credit and Debit Cards
Credit Cards; Charge Cards; Pre-paid Cards; Debit Cards; Co-branded Cards; Contactless Cards
Remittance Products
Electronic Payment Systems; National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT); Real Time Gross Settlement
(RTGS); Electronic Clearing Services (ECS); National Automated Clearing House (NACH) System;
Aadhaar enabled Payment System (AePS); Bharat Bill Payment System (BBPS); Benchmarking India’s
Payment System
Digitisation of Retail Banking Products
Technology in Retail Banking; Technology Processes in Retail Banking; Some Important User Friendly
Features; Customer Analytics; Institute for Development and Research on Banking Technologies
(IDRBT); Indian Financial Network (INFINET); Structured Financial Messaging System (SFMS);
National Financial Switch (NFS); Indian Banking Community Cloud (IBCC); Wealth Management
Solutions; Digital Lending
x | SYLLABUS

=== PAGE 12 ===
Role of AI and Technology in Retail Banking
Dimensions of Banking Technology; Banking Today; Relationship between Banking and Technology;
Evolution of Banking Technology; A New Era in Banking; Evolution of Banking Technology in India;
Challenges towards adoption of Technology by Indian Banks; Technology in Retail Banking; Benefits
of Technology in Retail Banking; Artificial Intelligence (AI); Difference between Artificial Intelligence
(AI) 	and Automation; Evolution of Artificial Intelligence; Artificial Intelligence Industry in India;
Artificial Intelligence in Indian Banking Industry; Indian Banks and the Technology; Why AI in Banking
Industry?; Benefits of Artificial Intelligence Technology in Banking and Finance; Artificial Intelligence
in Retail Banking; Artificial Intelligence in Retail Banking in India; The Challenges Facing India’s AI
Development; Benefits of AI in Retail Banking
Recovery of Retail Loans
Repayment in Retail Loans; Default and Re-scheduling in Retail Loans; Monitoring of Loan Accounts;
Classification of Irregular Loan Accounts; Recovery Policy of Banks; Securitization and Reconstruction
of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (SARFAESI Act); Debt Recovery
Tribunal (DRT); Recovery through Lok Adalat; Engaging Direct Recovery Agents
Management Information Systems
The main elements of MIS; Role of Management Information Systems; Role of MIS in Improving
decision making; Role of MIS in Banking Industry; Designing MIS for a Bank; Issues Related to
Management Information System (MIS); Suggestions for Solution to MIS related Issues
Securitization
Securitization of Assets
MODULE C: SUPPORT SERVICES – MARKETING OF BANKING SERVICES/
PRODUCTS
Marketing: An Introduction
Marketing in Retail Banking; Marketing Mix in Retail Banking
Delivery Channels in Retail Banking
Channel Experience; Physical/Direct Channels – Branch; Automated Teller Machines; Point of Sale
Terminal; Mobile Banking; Internet Banking; Customer’s Liability on Unauthorized Electronic
Transactions
Delivery Models
Delivery Models; Internal Customers – Staff at the Branch Level; Dedicated Marketing Managers;
Direct Selling Agents (DSAs); Tie-up with Institutions/OEMs/Dealers, etc.
SYLLABUS | xi

=== PAGE 13 ===
Customer Relationship Management in Retail Banking
Customer Relationship Management in Retail Banking; Why CRM?; Implementation Aspects of CRM
in Banks; Implementation Process of CRM in Banks; Implementation Stages in CRM; Benefits of CRM;
Impact of CRM on Customer Satisfaction
Service Standards for Retail Banking
Members of BCSBI; Main Aims and Objects; Code of Banks’ Commitment; Code of Banks Commitment
to Micro and Small Enterprises; Function of BCSBI; Code Compliance Rating; Customer Grievances
Handling Mechanism; General Information
Marketing Information Systems- A Longitudinal Analysis
Functions of MKIS; Components of MKIS; The MKIS Model; Observations; Usage of Computers in
MKIS; Supports for Marketing Management; Supports for Marketing Mix Decisions; Use of Decision
Models; Performance of MKIS; Recommendations; Advantages of MKIS
MODULE D: WEALTH MANAGEMENT
Importance of Wealth Management
Wealth Management – Broad View; Wealth Management Business Structures; Wealth management
process; Wealth Management Products and Services; Alternative asset; Bond; Insurance; Mutual fund;
Real estate Service; Retirement Planning; Strategic Business Strategy; Will Writing; Private Wealth
Management; Personal Financial Planning; Wealth Management Assessment; Private Banking; Benefits
of Wealth management; Importance of Wealth Management
Investment Management
Element of Investment; Basics of Investment Management; Steps in Investment Management; Investment
Banking; Services being offered by Full-service Investment Banks; Investment Bank Organizational
Structure; Investment Management Vs Investment Banking; Portfolio Management; Objectives of
Portfolio Management; Key Elements of Portfolio Management; Portfolio Management Vs Investment
Banking; Role of Portfolio Manager; Portfolio Management Service Vs Mutual Funds (MFs); Types of
Portfolio Management Services; Steps of the Portfolio Management Process; Advantages of Portfolio
Management Services; Disadvantages of PMS; Recent developments in the Portfolio Management
Services area in India
Tax Planning
Classification of Tax Structure in India; Financial Year; Assessment Year; Previous Year; Concept of
Previous Year & Financial Year vis-a-vis Assessment Year; Residential Status for Income Tax; A few
important terms in Income Tax; Heads of Income for computation of the total income; Income Tax
Slab rate for FY 2021-22 (AY 2022-23); Conditions for opting New Tax Regime; Example for Old Tax
Regime Vs New Tax Regime & which is better; Income Tax Slabs for non-individual entities; Investment
Products for Tax Savings; Estate Planning-Tax Planning through Wills/ Trusts; Capital Gains Tax
xii | SYLLABUS

=== PAGE 14 ===
Other Financial Services Provided by Banks
Distribution of Third Party Products in Retail Banking; Mutual Fund Business; Insurance Business;
Some Social Security Insurance Schemes; Cross Selling; Depository Services by Banks; Portfolio
Management Services; Factoring; Other Agency Business by Banks
ADDITIONAL READING MATERIAL ON HOME LOANS
Lender’s Appraisal Procedure
Appraisal Procedures; Application Form; Documents to be Submitted for Availing a Home Loan;
Application Received through Agent; Appraisal of Loan Request; Other Relevant Issues at Pre-sanction
Stage; Documentation; Mortgage; Registration of Documents; Detection of Forged and Fabricated
Title Deeds; Other Securities; Registration of Charges with CERSAI on Security Internet; Monitoring;
Closure of Account; Home Loan Frauds
Housing Finance and Tax Planning
Tax Benefits in Respect of Housing Finance
Mortgage Advice
Development of “Home Information Packs”; Time Value of Money-interest and Annuities; Capital
Gains; Loan Calculator and Loan Amortization Schedule
Valuation of Real Property
Who does Valuation?; Land with Building; Life of Structures; Sinking Fund; Reverse Mortgage
SYLLABUS | xiii

=== PAGE 15 ===


=== PAGE 16 ===
CONTENTS
Foreword 	v
MODULE A: RETAIL BANKING
1. Retail Banking: Introduction 	3
2. Retail Banking: Role within the Bank Operations 	27
3. Applicability of Retail Banking Concepts and Distinction between Retail and
Corporate/Wholesale Banking 	33
4. Branch Profitability 	49
MODULE B: RETAIL PRODUCTS AND RECOVERY
5. Customer Requirements 	73
6. Product Development Process 	87
7. Credit Scoring 	117
8. Important Retail Liability Products 	129
9. Important Retail Asset Products 	165
10. Credit and Debit Cards 	185
11. Remittance Products 	213
12. Digitisation of Retail Banking Products 	251
13. Role of AI and Technology in Retail Banking 	269
14. Recovery of Retail Loans 	295
15. Management Information Systems 	323
16. Securitization 	333
MODULE C: SUPPORT SERVICES – MARKETING OF BANKING SERVICES/PRODUCTS
17. Marketing: An Introduction 	347
18. Delivery Channels in Retail Banking 	355

=== PAGE 17 ===
19. Delivery Models 	397
20. Customer Relationship Management in Retail Banking 	409
21. Service Standards for Retail Banking 	423
22. Marketing Information Systems-A Longitudinal Analysis 	437
MODULE D: WEALTH MANAGEMENT
23. Importance of Wealth Management 	451
24. Investment Management 	471
25. Tax Planning 	493
26. Other Financial Services Provided by Banks 	517
ADDITIONAL READING MATERIAL ON HOME LOANS
27. Lender’s Appraisal Procedure 	553
28. Housing Finance and Tax Planning 	583
29. Mortgage Advice 	591
30. Valuation of Real Property 	613
Appendix 	629
References 	631
xvi | CONTENTS

=== PAGE 18 ===
MODULE – A
RETAIL BANKING
Unit 1: Retail Banking: Introduction
Unit 2: Retail Banking: Role within the Bank Operations
Unit 3: Applicability of Retail Banking Concepts and Distinction between Retail
and Corporate/Wholesale Banking
Unit 4: Branch Profitability

=== PAGE 19 ===


=== PAGE 20 ===
U N I T	U N I T
1 RETAIL BANKING:
INTRODUCTION
STRUCTURE
1.0 	Objectives
1.1 	Introduction
1.2 	Characteristics of Retail Banking
1.3 	Advantages of Retail Banking
1.4 	Constraints in Retail Banking
1.5 	Evolution of Retail Banking
1.6 	Prerequisite for Success of Retail Banking
1.7 	Challenges for Retail Banking
1.8 	Future of Retail Banking
Let Us Sum Up
Keywords
Check Your Progress
Answers to Check Your Progress

=== PAGE 21 ===
4 | RETAIL BANKING & WEALTH MANAGEMENT
1.0 	OBJECTIVES
The objectives of this unit are to understand the:
• 	History and definition of Retail Banking
• 	Characteristics of Retail Banking
• 	Advantages and constraints of Retail Banking
• 	Retail banking scenario in India – Why Retail Banking? Factors for Success, Challenges,
Future Strategy
• 	Global trend in Retail Banking
1.1 	INTRODUCTION
The Indian economy over the past decades has been witnessing an upswing due to the liberalization
policy adopted by the planners. The economic changes have given rise to increased income and
saving levels leading to increased demand on the financial markets and more particularly on
banks, which continue to be a safe and secure source for individual savings and investments.
In recent times, banks have been moving away from their traditional banking role and are open
to change in response to the multifarious demands of customers/ society. From a mere service
provider to park surpluses, banks have blossomed into one stop financial hub for all kinds of
financial needs of the customers. Banks have come out with various alternatives which can
cater to almost all needs of various type of customers due to innovation and positioning of new
products and processes.
Considering the increased competition, there is a felt need for the banks to be innovative and
develop different products with a variety of features to cater the needs of varied profile of
customers. It becomes imperative on the part of the banks to develop products customized
to suit the needs of variety of customers and move away from a Product Centric Approach to
Customer Centric Approach. Banks have slowly started realising that the customer is the king
and to retain the customer, especially in a tough competitive market, they have to satisfy all the
financial needs by offering products to suit the customers’ requirements.
Intermediation is the primary function of banks and mobilisation of deposits is the first step to
intermediation. They accept deposit from public and lend it to the enterprise class engaged in
productive activities. The robustness of any economy depends to a great extent on the savings
that are generated in it. These savings constitute the source for creation of further wealth by
deploying them in tune with economic directions adopted by a country. Investments stimulate
economic activities to greater heights leading to economic prosperity.
Despite the changes in the functions performed by banks, the major function of the bank
remain as collecting deposits and lending including retail lending. Banks have accordingly
developed various variants of deposit as well as lending products with special emphasis on
retail lending products to suit various requirements of variety of customers from all segments
of the society.

=== PAGE 22 ===
RETAIL BANKING: INTRODUCTION | 5
Retail Banking refers to provision of banking products and services offered to individual
customers, typically for non-entrepreneurial purposes. On the liability side, banking has
generally been ‘retail’, i.e., the banks have raised resources primarily from a large number of
retail depositors. In asset side also, the focus has been on lending to large number of customers
with low ticket size. Thus, on the whole, retail banking involves offering of products of both
sides of the balance sheet, e.g., fixed deposit, current/savings accounts on the liability side; and
mortgages, loans (e.g., personal, housing, auto and educational) on the asset side. Additionally,
retail banking also involves offering of credit cards, depository services, para-banking products
and services viz., insurance products, capital market products, etc., to individuals.
Typically, retail banking begins with a target clientele, which is the common masses, and it
slowly graduates through a stage, which can be called as ‘class retail banking.’ The ‘mass retail
banking’ is the stage in which the bank provides standardized banking products and services to
its customers. In this phase, the banks attempt to build a sufficiently broad customer base which
can serve as a stable source of funding. The ‘class retail banking’, on the other hand, is the stage
in which the bank offers customized products and services targeted at a niche customer segment,
the high net worth individuals. Retail banking focused solely at a niche customer segment may
also be termed as private banking.
A graphical representation of the positioning of mass retail banking vis-à-vis other segments
of banking is as under:
(Source: RBI Website)
Definitions:
Before we move further, let us have a look “What is Retail Banking”? Let us see the different
definitions of retail banking.

=== PAGE 23 ===
6 | RETAIL BANKING & WEALTH MANAGEMENT
“Retail Banking, also known as consumer banking or personal banking, is banking that provides
financial services to individual consumers rather than businesses. Retail banking is a way for
individual consumers to manage their money, have access to credit, and deposit their money in
a secure manner”.
“Retail Banking is a banking service that is geared primarily towards individual consumers.
Retail banking is usually made available by commercial banks. Unlike wholesale banking, retail
banking focuses strictly on consumer markets. Retail banking entities provide a wide range of
personal banking services, including offering savings and other operative accounts, bill paying
services, as well as debit and credit cards. Through retail banking, consumers may also obtain
mortgages and personal loans. Although retail banking is, for the most part, mass-market driven,
many retail banking products may also extend to small and medium sized businesses. Today,
much of retail banking is streamlined electronically via Automated Teller Machines (ATMs),
or through virtual retail banking known as online banking.”
“Retail Banking deals with lending money to consumers. This includes a wide variety of loans,
including credit cards, mortgage loans and auto loans, and can also be used to refer to loans
taken out at either the prime rate or the subprime rate.”
“Retail banking refers to banking in which banking institutions execute transactions directly
with consumers, rather than corporations or other entities”.
Retail Banking refers to “the part of a bank’s operations providing services at its branches for
small (in bank terms) account holders.”
“Banking services offered to individual customers such as savings accounts, retail loans,
remittance services, etc.”
“Pure retail banking is generally conceived to be the provision of mass market banking services
to private individuals. It has been expanded over the years to include in many cases services
provided to small- and medium-sized businesses. Some banks may also include their “private
banking” business (i.e., services to high net worth individuals) in their definition of retail
banking.”
What Does Retail Banking Provide?
Retail banking provides financial services to individual consumers rather than large institutions.
• 	Services offered include savings and current accounts, mortgages, personal loans, debit or
credit cards, and certificates of deposit (CDs).
• 	Retail banks can be local community banks or the divisions of large commercial banks.
• 	In the digital age, many fintech companies can provide all of the same services as retail
banks through internet platforms and smartphone apps.
• 	While retail banking services are provided to individuals in the general public, corporate
banking services are only provided to small or large companies and corporate bodies.

=== PAGE 24 ===
RETAIL BANKING: INTRODUCTION | 7
1.2 	CHARACTERISTICS OF RETAIL BANKING
Retail Banking provides banking services to multiple customer groups with multiple products
through multiple channels of distribution. The definitions of retail banking as discussed above
bring out the following characteristics:
1. 	Banking facilities are targeted at individual customers or small organisations.
2. 	Meets the need of a large number of customers with well diversified portfolios.
3. 	It is focussed towards the mass market segment covering a large population of individuals
and non-individual entities.
4. 	It offers different liability, asset and a plethora of service products to the various customer
categories.
5. 	The delivery model of retail banking is both physical and virtual, i.e., services are extended
through branches and also through technology driven electronic off-site delivery channels
like ATMs, Internet Banking, Mobile Banking, Phone Banking, etc.
6. 	The services are extended to small- and medium-size businesses as well.
In short, Retail Banking encompasses multiple products in liability, asset, cards, digital banking,
payments, etc.; it caters to multiple customer groups in both individual as well as non-individual
categories & multiple channels of distribution in both physical as well as virtual space.
1.3 	ADVANTAGES OF RETAIL BANKING
1. 	Client base will be large and therefore risk is spread across the customer base.
2. 	Customer loyalty will be strong with a good scope for cross selling and customers tend not
to change from one bank to another very often.
3. 	Attractive and wide interest spreads since customers are too fragmented to bargain effectively;
Credit risk tends to be well diversified, as loan amounts are relatively small. There is less
volatility in demand and credit cycle than from large corporates. Large numbers of clients
can facilitate marketing, mass selling and the ability to categorize/select clients using scoring
systems/data mining.
1.4 	CONSTRAINTS IN RETAIL BANKING
Though retail banking as a segment has a number of embedded advantages, the segment suffers
from constraints too. A few of the constraints are as listed below:
1. 	Problems in managing large numbers of clients, especially if the available IT systems are
not sufficiently robust.
2. 	Rapid evolution of products can lead to IT complications.
3. 	The costs of maintaining branch networks and handling large numbers of low-value
transactions tend to be relatively high. (For this reason, banks are encouraging clients to use

=== PAGE 25 ===
8 | RETAIL BANKING & WEALTH MANAGEMENT
cheaper distribution channels, such as ATMs, the mobile or the internet for these transactions
and reserve the branches for higher value added transactions).
4. 	Higher delinquencies especially in unsecured retail loans and credit card receivables.
5. 	Any loss in faith in a particular bank can lead to sudden outflow of retail deposits resulting
in collapse of the bank. This is called a bank run.
6. 	The competition is very fierce which may sometimes lead to unhealthy competition.
1.5 	EVOLUTION OF RETAIL BANKING
Having understood what retail banking is all about; let us see the evolution and history of retail
banking.
Retail Banking as a Business Model
Retail Banking, as a business model of banks, had evolved over the years from the traditional
banking space. Historically, banking in the Indian scenario before 1960s was identified with
lending to business and corporate clients for working capital and project financing. The traditional
forms of banking in the above period was restricted to class clients and satisfy their total banking
requirements in the form of financing for raw materials, work in progress, finished goods and
bills receivables. For delivering these services, various products, instruments and facilities were
introduced to serve the corporate customers. The operative accounts, like current accounts for
extending the above services, formed an integral part of the services. The basic premises, under
which these services were structured, were that the needs and requirements were straight and
simple. But over a period of time, as the needs and wants of the customers expanded and more
and more products and services were needed, banks had redesigned their product and service
paradigm. There was an absolute need by banks to develop specialized and sophisticated products
to meet the manifold and diverse growth of organizations. The stage had come where the legacy
architecture of banks was unable to service the diverse needs, and hence emergence of banks
with functional focus came into existence. From being plain vanilla commercial functions,
banks took new avatars like Investment Banks and Merchant Banks, to carry out the investment
side of banking and also corporate capital raising, fund raising and debt structuring activities.
Investment function was hived off as a separate activity and also standalone investment banks
had emerged to take care of the multi-dimensional functions of Investment Banking, Mergers
and Acquisitions, etc. Merchant Banks were the answer for Capital and Debt raising and other
related activities. But the buck did not stop there as banking was always on the explosion mode
and there was absolute necessity for banks to reposition themselves with newer business models
to satisfy the ever-changing needs of the existing customers and also to cater to the expectations
of the new class of emerging customers. As the evolution of banking was a continuous process,
with the broadening of the customer base, and the character of the customers’ base changed
from homogenous to heterogeneous over a period of time, banks were under the compulsion to
redesign their products and services models to cater to these customers and fulfill their varied

=== PAGE 26 ===
RETAIL BANKING: INTRODUCTION | 9
needs. Thus, came corporate banking and retail banking. In some banks, retail banking was
christened as consumer banking, as the focus was towards individual consumers.
Capgemini brings out World Retail Banking Reports from time to time. “The World Retail
Banking Report 2015” was released by Capgemini and European Financial Management &
Marketing Association (EFMA). The major findings were:
• 	Banks are falling short of customer expectations. Customer expectations are on the rise at
a faster pace than banks can handle. Positive customer behavior is also on the decline. The
shift is mainly on account of younger generation, who are less likely to take debt, more
likely to leave, and less likely to refer friends or buy additional retail products.
• 	Competition from non-bank players is accelerating. Banks are still unsure about the impact
of non-bank players and this may lead to threat to core business in future.
• 	Banks focus too much on the front end at the cost of back end service. Banks need to continue
to invest in the front office because that is the first interaction for the customer experience.
But, at the same time, they can no longer defer the significant efforts required on the middle
and back-end because the clients don’t want to be exposed at the back-end and do not accept
that it takes three weeks to be provided with paperwork, etc.
The World Retail Banking Report 2016 by Capgemini and EFMA found that 63% of customers
across the globe are now using fintech products or services. Penetration is currently highest in the
emerging markets and among younger customers but is expected to increase in all geographies
and ages. While 96% of banking executives agreed that the industry is evolving towards a digital
banking ecosystem, only 13% say they have the systems in place to support it. Fintech providers
are gaining popularity among consumers – thanks to the perception that they are easy to use,
offer fast service and provide a good experience. Only 36% of banks agree that Fintech offer fast
service and only 40% agreeing that Fintech provide a good experience. Competition is evolving
into acceptance, with 65% of bank executives saying they view Fintech firms as partners.
Retail Banking Scenario in India
The evolution of retail banking in India can be traced back to the entry of foreign banks. The
conventional banking business by Public Sector Banks (PSBs) was done on a more generalized
approach and there was no specific demarcation as retail and non-retail activities. Customer and
Industry segmentation was adopted within the overall business plan of banks. Offering products
and services based on specific consumer segments was not attempted in a focused way. Foreign
banks operating in India set the trend and in the late 1970 and early 1980s and came out with
their consumer banking models with hybrid liability and asset products specifically targeted
at the personal segment. Standard Chartered Bank and Grindlays Bank were the pioneers in
introducing these types of products. Citibank created waves in the early 1980s with their credit
card products and spurred the retail banking space. State Bank of India and some public sector
banks like Indian Overseas Bank, Bank of India, Bank of Baroda and Andhra Bank developed
and marketed asset products and card products to cater to retail segment. In fact, Bank of Baroda

=== PAGE 27 ===
10 | RETAIL BANKING & WEALTH MANAGEMENT
and Andhra Bank were two of the early players in the credit card business in the PSB space.
The entry of new generation private sector banks in early 1990s has created a new approach to
retail banking by banks. With the advantage of technology right from start, these banks had a
clear positioning for retail banking and aggressively strategized for creating new markets for
the retail segment. In addition, the new generation private banks had posed a threat to the retail
business of foreign banks that had by then well-defined business models for retail banking. To
add to the fuel, PSBs also with technology initiatives and redefined business model for retail
had aggressively entered the market space, creating a retail war and capture their share of the
pie in the liberalized economic environment and the resultant opportunities in retail banking.
The retail war is in full swing now with a win – win situation for all the players and the focus
is on capturing and improving the market share and customer base.
India’s preparedness for IT revolution has impacted the banking sector significantly. It created
a need for Private sector banks as also public sector banks to adopt core banking solution. It
led to organized and comprehensive computerization of operations of banks across all levels.
The growth of IT and its remarkable application to banking has greatly facilitated the growth
and development of retail banking in India to a large extent. IT has allowed the integration of
ATMs, mobile banking and internet banking. Due to technological advancement, India witnessed
the adoption of modern payment systems, securities settlement, electronic fund transfer, cheque
truncation system, ATMs and many other modern system of banking transactions.
Strong economic fundamentals, growing urban population, higher disposable incomes, rise in
young population, emergence of new customer segments and rise in the mass affluent space,
explosion of service economy in addition to manufacturing space have catapulted the scope
for retail banking business in India. The segment has become an important component in the
business design of the banks in India and almost all players in the foreign, public and private (old
and new) space are in this and it has become almost a fashion statement for all the players. The
retail plans basically stem from the enormous opportunities across geographies and customer
segments and the huge untapped potential for retail banking in India. There is a virtual gold
mine to be unearthed and even the top layer is not yet scratched fully. There is a whole lot of
customer pyramid to be tapped and the present activities till recently were confined only to the
top and higher middle end of the customer pyramid. Of late banks, especially foreign banks
and new generation private players are seriously looking at the bottom of the customer pyramid
and reengineering their retail strategies to develop independent and exclusive strategies for this
segment. In addition, the recent trend is that Non-Banking Finance Companies (NBFCs) and
MNCs have also aggressively entered and active in this ‘Bottom of the Pyramid’ segment and
posing a big threat to the conventional banking players.
RBI Data on Retail Banking in India
The Indian retail banking is in growth trajectory. There have been several recent developments
in Indian retail banking. The growth in various elements of retail banking space over the past
few years are published by RBI in their Bulletin, “Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in

=== PAGE 28 ===
RETAIL BANKING: INTRODUCTION | 11
India & Financial Stability Report”, which reflects the business performance achieved in the
retail assets and other services by banks as under:
I. Growth Rate of Retail Assets of the Banking System
(Amount in ₹ Billion)
S
No.
Type of Retail Asset 	2019 	2020 	2021
1. 	Housing Loans 	12044 	13965 	15619
Percentage growth over the previous year 	19.5 	15.9 	11.8
2. 	Consumer durable loans 	92 	111 	216
Percentage growth over the previous year 	-51.7 	21.3 	93.4
3. 	Credit Card Receivables 	1113 	1321 	1386
Percentage growth over the previous year 	34.5 	18.6 	4.9
4. 	Vehicle/ Auto Loans 	2697 	2894 	3295
Percentage growth over the previous year 	12.9 	7.3 	13.9
5 	Other Retail / Personal Loans 	6335 	7510 	8560
Percentage growth over the previous year 	22.77 	18.54 	13.99
6. 	Educational Loans 	762 	791 	788
Percentage growth over the previous year 	1.8 	3.7 	-0.3
Total Retail Loans 	23043 	26592 	29864
Percentage growth over the previous year 	18.6 	15.4 	12.3
(Source: Trend and progress of banking in India 2020-21-RBI)
II. Percentage of Retail Assets to Total Assets of the Banking System
S. No. 	Details of Advances 	2019 	2020 	2021
1. 	Total Advances of Banking System 	95269 	100984 	106408
2. 	Percentage growth over the previous year 	13.4 	6.00 	5.4
3. 	Percentage share of Retail to Total Advances 	24.18 	26.33 	28.06
III. Number of ATMs of Schedule Commercial Banks
ATMs 	Number as on
31.03.2019
Number as on
31.03.2020
Number as on
31.03.2021
Number of Onsite ATMs 	106259 	113271 	115605
Number of Offsite ATMs 	95813 	97489 	97970
Total Number of ATMs 	202072 	210760 	213575
Number of Bank Branches 	120535 	122994 	122976
ATMs as percentage of Bank Branches 	167% 	171% 	173%
Number of Branches covered under CBS 	120535 	122994 	122976
Coverage of Branches 	100% 	100% 	100%
(Source: RBI Bulletin)

=== PAGE 29 ===
12 | RETAIL BANKING & WEALTH MANAGEMENT
IV. Other/ New Payment Infrastructure
(Lakhs)
Payment Infrastructure 	Number as on
31.03.2019
Number as on
31.03.2020
Number as on
31.03.2021
White Label ATMs 	- 	0.23 	0.25
Micro ATMs 	- 	2.71 	4.04
Bharat QR* 	- 	20.27 	35.70
UPI QR** 	- 	- 	925.22
(Source: RBI Bulletin)
V. Payment System Indicators
S.
No.
System 	2018-19
Vol.
(Mn.)
2018-19
Value
(Bn.)
2019-20
Vol.
(Mn.)
2019-20
Value
(Bn.)
2020-21
Vol.
(Mn.)
2020-21
Value
(Bn.)
1. 	RTGS 	136 	1356881 	150 	1311564 	159 	1055998
2. 	NEFT 	2318 	227936 	2744 	229455 	3092 	251309
3. 	ECS(DR) 	0.9 	12 	0.1 	0.39 	- 	-
4. 	ECS(CR) 	5.4 	132 	1.8 	51 	- 	-
5. 	IMPS 	1752 	15902 	2579 	23375 	3278 	29415
6. 	NACH (CR) 	883 	7296 	1129 	10432 	1646 	12327
7. 	NACH(DR) 	483 	5224 	734 	7182 	963 	8689
8. 	UPI 	5391 	8769 	12518 	21317 	22330 	41036
9. 	Credit Card 	1762 	6034 	2177 	7309 	1764 	6304
10. 	Debit Card 	4414 	5934 	5061 	7039 	4020 	6626
11. 	Prepaid
Instruments
4607 	2133 	5381 	2155 	4974 	1976
12 	Mobile Banking 	6200 	29583 	13926 	57815 	25210 	90543
The above data throws open the following interesting revelations about the performance of
the retail banking as well as innovative ways to provide service to the retails customers in the
recent past.
Performance of Different Segments of Retail Banking from 2019 to 2021
1. 	Banks’ retail loan portfolio registered double-digit growth. The housing loan component
which constitutes more than 52% of the total retail portfolio of banks increased by
29.68% from 2019 to 2021. All though there is slight decline in growth as compared to the
corresponding previous year. Retail loan portfolio of banks continued to grow at around an
average 29.60% during 2019-2021 even though there was deceleration in the total credit

=== PAGE 30 ===
RETAIL BANKING: INTRODUCTION | 13
growth of banks. Auto loan registered an average growth rate of 22.19% during 2019-21.
Credit card receivable grew by more than 24%. The significant growth has emerged from
several quarters—mortgage loans (Housing), personal loans, credit card, etc.
2. 	Weak domestic demand and subdued performance of the corporate sector moderated the
demand for bank credit. As a result, at the end of March 2021, gross outstanding credit of
scheduled commercial banks increased by 5.4% to ₹106408 billion, as against of 6% and
13.4% during the corresponding previous year 2020 and 2019 respectively.
3. 	The geographic reach of ATMs increased further all though the ATMs by scheduled
commercial banks remained constant around 0.22 million during 2019-21. Number of White
label ATMs registered almost 100% growth during the same period. Micro ATMs grew by
49% over corresponding previous year March 2020.
4. 	New system known QR code emerged as most popular payment system during 2020-2021.
More than 96 million static QR codes were registered as on March 21. QR codes became
very cost effective and most convenient way of payment of small value transactions.
5. 	Outstanding Debit card grew by 8.40% during 2020-21. Supply of debit card to each Savings
Bank/ operative account holder is a basic banking requirement now a days.
6. 	Credit card registered growth of 31.77% as on March 21 as against March 19. However,
there was nominal growth in the volume of credit card transaction during 2019 to 2021.
7. 	Retail electronic and QR code as well as card based payments registered quantum jump
in the past two years. The promotion policy for digital transactions has added fuel to the
rapid growth. UPI transactions have created new record of volume and value on monthly
basis. Mobile banking has grown more than four time during 2019 to 2021 and became
most preferred way of banking. Decline/ nominal growth in the volume and value of other
payment systems is due to preferred mobile transactions by the customers.
The different scenarios in retail banking indicated various dimensions of retail banking and its im-
pact on profitability. Retail banking is a critical source of revenue and profitability for most major
banks around the world. According to a research study by Boston Consulting Group, retail seg-
ment brings in nearly 60% of the total banking revenue worldwide. It is expected that this situation
will continue and retail banking will remain the dominant source of revenue for banks worldwide
through the years to follow. But the fact is that retail banks are facing tougher competition and de-
clining margins and to overcome this, banks have to develop winning models and requisite skills.
1.6 	PREREQUISITE FOR SUCCESS OF RETAIL BANKING
There are various factors that can subscribe to the success of retail banking in India, a few of
which are listed herein below:

=== PAGE 31 ===
14 | RETAIL BANKING & WEALTH MANAGEMENT
Presence of an efficient delivery mechanism
It is the most important pre-requisite for retail banking to succeed. What essentially binds customers
to their bank is the quality of services offered, the fairness and affordability of pricing and the
promptness of service. While there is not much scope for the banks to differentiate their product and
service offerings, in so far as the basic products are concerned, it is important for the bank to enhance
the customer experience by ensuring that the services are made available whenever and wherever
the customer demands them. Further, the banks can bring down their cost of service delivery, if and
only if they are able to improve operational efficiency. In a nutshell, the banks should be able to
deliver the products and services to the customers in safe, secure, prompt and cost effective manner
by leveraging technology. In future, customers’ needs and preferences will increasingly drive the
integration of all types of banking channels mainly alternate channels. Channel innovation, which
has changed the face of banking in recent years, must continue to spearhead the charge. There is
much to be gained from innovation including improved customer engagement, agility efficiency
and regulatory compliance. Not to mention, that even banks’ long term future might depend on how
well they innovate.
Direct Banking: The Fastest-Growing and Dominant Channel of the Future
Direct banking, which is usually thought of as just online banking from a specific institution,
compasses a wide range of channel approaches to sell and service customers’ needs, including
ATMs, call and email centres, mobile banking devices, direct mail, and a variety of web-based
models. Statistics show direct marketing to be the fastest-growing channel to retail bank
customers. Over the last five years, the number of households banking online have grown at a
compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of over 20 percent. It is believed direct-banking sales
volumes are poised to grow even further over the next five to 10 years as the channel evolves
primarily from a service tool to support branch networks to a customer-driven platform for
collaboration and relationship management across a wide range of sales and service needs and
making services available without physical presence and beyond geographical boundaries,
round the clock.
Product appropriateness
Another essential pre-condition for the success of retail banking is appropriateness of product
and services for the customers. As the banks strive to bring in new customers into their fold and
also to retain the existing ones, they must invest heavily into data analytics and assess what are
the appropriate products and services for the specific groups of their customers. The banks have
to be sensitive about the customers’ needs and requirements.
Pricing
The pricing demonstrates that the products and services, both on the liability as well as on the
asset side, are heavily weighed against the retail customers as a group.

=== PAGE 32 ===
RETAIL BANKING: INTRODUCTION | 15
Scoring models for assessing the credit worthiness
The scoring models are being used for assessing the credit worthiness of borrowers to bring
in greater transparency and efficiency. Credit scoring model is a statistical technique that
combines several financial characteristics to predict the behaviour of new applicants based on
the performance of existing borrowers. Some banks started employing credit scoring even in
retail segment. Most of the banks are using credit information reports to assess the financial
discipline of the applicants. This is also based on scoring.
Consumer protection environment
Across the globe, the regulators and supervisors are turning increasingly intolerant of unfair
market practices adopted by the market participants. It has been observed that large amounts of
penalties are levied on banks by the regulators mainly for failing to protect consumers’ interests
and for unfair practices. More focus needs to be given to develop conviction on the customers
that their rights are adequately protected. This has culminated in creation of separate
authorities for enforcing fair market conduct and for protection of financial consumers. Therefore,
unless the banks in the developing countries are firmly committed to treating their customers
fairly and put in place appropriate systems and processes, they would be well advised to refrain
from riding the bandwagon of retail banking.
1.7 	CHALLENGES FOR RETAIL BANKING
Consumer Protection & Pricing
There are several examples reported on pricing being arbitrary and, to a certain extent, illogical.
There are charges for non-maintenance of minimum balance, charges for cheque return and
there are charges even where no service has been provided – customers not conducting any
transactions, etc. Another disquieting feature in the pricing of products and services by banks,
and that is – the poor subsidising the rich. For the retail banking model to be successful, banks’
pricing should be non-discriminatory, risk-based, competitive and value added.
Inadequacy of MIS
A crucial input for success of any business is the accurate, consistent and granular information
about its various components. The data on segmental revenues and segments of profits are not
available with any granularity. Under the circumstances, the banks would find it very difficult
to make their pricing risk based. It is crucial, therefore, that if the retail banking has to be rolled
out successfully, the banks would need to build an appropriate MIS.
Understanding of KYC/AML issues
The banks in the developed countries have faced significant amount of penalties from the
regulators for their failure to conduct adequate due diligence on their customers. Even, in India,
RBI had imposed penalties on some of the banks for their failure to have proper due diligence

=== PAGE 33 ===
16 | RETAIL BANKING & WEALTH MANAGEMENT
on their customers. It is important, therefore, to understand and appreciate KYC requirements
in all manifestations – be it for the products on the asset side of the balance sheet or on the
liability side. Banks would also need to be mindful about the KYC due diligence for the third-
party products that they sell from their premises/through their delivery channel.
Managing Risk
The retail banking business involves dealing with a large number of customers over varied
delivery channels, thereby creating significant vulnerabilities across banks’ systems. These could
be in the form of inadequacy of internal guidelines or non-adherence by staff, inadequacy in the
technology systems supplied by vendors, fraudulent practices employed by customers, hackers,
etc. Though banks have developed sufficient safeguards to deal with operational risk associated
with traditional delivery channels, it is essential for adequate safeguards for non-traditional
delivery channels, as evident from large number of technology related frauds being witnessed
across Indian banks in the past few years. The banks would also need to recognize and manage
risks arising from mis-selling, etc., besides the other business risks like market risk, liquidity
risk, interest rate risk, etc. Unless banks address these issues quickly, even the low-value frauds
would have the potential to cause reputational risk and unwarranted litigation for the banks.
Now fraudsters/hackers have moved beyond the physical boundaries and time zones open new
vulnerabilities. At times technical innovation and upgradations makes the existing systems
vulnerable. Lack of customer literacy (more specifically about technology based products) opens
up new risks. It is, therefore, absolutely important that the banks improve their risk management
systems to address these issues.
Effects of disruptive new technologies
With the increased proliferation of alternate delivery channels (ATMs, internet mobile banking
and QR codes), retail banking has become the segment impacted most by technology. While the
use of technology-aided delivery channels has grown multifold, so has the scope for fraudulent
transactions through impersonations, identity thefts, sim swap, and device control apps etc.
Banks would also need to quickly put in place lasting technology-based solutions to thwart the
efforts of fraudsters and minimize the customer complaints. As the use of new delivery channels
gets more popular, the banks would need to ensure that their customers continue to have good
experience with their service offerings and remain loyal to them.
Continuing growth
Despite banks’ concerted efforts on increasing the banking penetration and bringing more and
more adult population under the formal financial system over the last 7–8 years, more than half
of the target population remains uncovered. Similarly, the credit penetration from the banking
system in the country is abysmally low at about 10%. In absence of access to formal sources
of finance, the alternate cost of funds for the people is exorbitantly high. As the pricing of
loans no longer remains restricted, due to any regulatory/ government fiat, the banks are free to
reasonably charge their customers.

=== PAGE 34 ===
RETAIL BANKING: INTRODUCTION | 17
All these means that the retail banking has a huge potential to grow in India over time. It is,
therefore, assumed that the challenge for the retail banks/banking is not one of finding new
customers or new markets; it is more of a mind-set issue. The banks need to get convinced about
financial inclusion as a viable and profit-making business proposition and pursue that objective
with a missionary zeal.
The growth of retail lending, especially in emerging economies, is attributable to the rapid
advances in information technology, the evolving macro-economic environment, financial market
reforms, and several micro-level demand and supply side factors. In the context of retail lending,
deployment of scoring models would minimize the subjective element and thereby fast-track
the decision-making process. Quality of services offered by the banks is going to be another
key differentiator. In ultimate analysis, providing better service to the customers would be the
key to generate larger revenue for the banks.
Reasons for the Growth of the Retail Banking Segment
There are various reasons that contribute to the growth trajectory of Retail Banking segment,
a few of which are as under:
a. 	Rise of the Young Indian Professionals: The rise of the Indian middle class is an important
contributory factor in this regard. The percentage of middle to high income Indian households
is expected to continue rising. The younger population not only wields increasing purchasing
power, but as far as acquiring personal debt is concerned, they are perhaps more comfortable
than previous generations. Improving consumer purchasing power, coupled with more liberal
attitudes toward personal debt, is contributing to India’s retail banking segment.
b. 	Growth as an Economic superpower: Retail banking has played a role in a growing
economy of India. As the growth story gets unfolded in India, retail banking is going to
emerge as a major driver. A. T. Kearney, a global management consulting firm, identified
India as the ‘second most attractive retail destination’ of the 30 emergent markets.
c. 	Increasing purchasing power of middle class people: The rise of the Indian middle class
is an important contributory factor in this regard. The percentage of middle to high income
Indian households is expected to continue rising. The younger population not only wields
increasing purchasing power, but as far as acquiring personal debt is concerned, they are
perhaps more comfortable than previous generations. Improving consumer purchasing
power, coupled with more liberal attitudes towards personal debt, is contributing to India’s
retail banking segment.
d. 	Financial market reforms: The subject matter of retail banking is of prime importance. In
recent years, commercial banks have witnessed development in the form of retail lending, all
over the world. The growth in the field of retail lending is primarily because of the speedy
advancement in the IT sector, evolving macroeconomic environment, numerous micro level
demand and supply side factors and financial market reforms. This criterion is based on the
market research report on retail banking.

=== PAGE 35 ===
18 | RETAIL BANKING & WEALTH MANAGEMENT
e. 	Engine of economic growth: Retail banks play a critical role in their home economies, and
their activities have implications for the global economy as well. They offer critical credit
functions, which largely fuel the engine of economic growth in their economies. When
problems hit the retail banking sector the result is often dire economic circumstances for the
economy as a whole. When retail banks are failing, little or no credit is available for credit
seekers, and economic activity becomes depressed.
f. 	Mass-market banking: Retail banks offer a variety of important services to their customers.
The retail banking sector is often described as a typical mass-market banking, offering
services such as savings and operative accounts and all kinds of personal loans, including
auto loans and student loans. Retail banks also offer mortgage services, debit and credit
card services and ATM services, all of which have become essential to today’s consumers.
g. 	Volume driven business: Retail Credit ensures that the business is widely dispersed
among a large customer base unlike in the case of corporate lending, where the risk may
be concentrated on a selected few. Ability of a bank to administer a large portfolio of retail
credit products depends upon such factors like; strong credit assessment capability, sound
documentation, adequate capital base, regular/constant follow-up, skilled human resource
and technological support.
h. 	Automation of banking process: The growth in retail banking has been facilitated by growth
in banking technology and automation of banking processes to enable extension of reach
and rationalization of costs. ATMs have emerged as an alternative banking delivery channel
which facilitates low-cost transactions vis-à-vis traditional branches/method of lending. It
also has the advantage of reducing the branch traffic and enables banks with small networks
to offset the traditional disadvantages by increasing their reach and spread.
i. 	Easy and affordable access: Banks provide retail loans through a wide range of options/
flexibility. Banks even finance cost of registration, stamp duty, society charges and other
associated expenditures such as furniture and fixtures in case of housing loans and cost of
registration and insurance, etc., in case of auto loans.
j. 	Financial Liquidity: Banks making financing attractive by offering free/concessional/
value added services like issue of credit card, insurance, etc. As also waiver of processing
fees administration fees, prepayment charges, etc., by the banks. In many a case, the cost
of retail lending is restricted to the interest costs.
k. 	Economic prosperity: The consequent increase in purchasing power has given a fillip to
a consumer boom. Note that during the 10 years after 1992, India’s economy grew at an
average rate of 6.8 percent and continues to grow almost at the same rate, not many countries
can match this performance.
l. 	Changing consumer demographics: The size of population indicates vast potential for
growth in consumption both qualitatively and quantitatively. India is one of the countries
having highest proportion (70%) of the population below 35 years of age (young population).
