
=== PAGE 1 ===
1
=== PAGE 2 ===
4
Published by McGraw Hill Education (India) Private Limited
Registered Office: Anjana Complex No: 5/90 A, Butt Road, St. Thomas Mount, Chennai 600 016
Indian Polity, 8e
Copyright © 2026 by McGraw Hill Education (India) Private Limited.
This book is protected under copyright law. Any unauthorized copying, reproduction, distribution,
adaptation, conversion, transmission, storage or use of this publication or any part or extract of it,
through any means or any medium, including electronic, mechanical, photocopied, recorded, or
otherwise, whether for any direct/indirect commercial gain or not, and without the prior written consent
of the publisher, is explicitly prohibited and will result in severe legal consequences. Such restrictions
apply to social media channels/groups, YouTube videos, audiobooks, AI applications, and any other
means of copying, reproducing, distributing, adapting, converting, transmitting, storing the content of
this book, using current or future technologies.
This edition can be exported from India only by the publisher,
McGraw Hill Education (India) Private Limited
Print Edition:
ISBN-13: 978-93-6444-767-6
ISBN-10: 93-6444-767-0
E-Book Edition:
ISBN-13: 978-93-6444-471-2
ISBN-10: 93-6444-471-X
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 7101558 29 28 27 26 25
Printed and bound in India.
Information contained in this work has been obtained by McGraw Hill Education (India), from sources
believed to be reliable. However, neither McGraw Hill Education (India) nor its authors guarantee the
accuracy or completeness of any information published herein, and neither McGraw Hill Education
(India) nor its authors shall be responsible for any errors, omissions, or damages arising out of use of this
information. This work is published with the understanding that McGraw Hill Education (India) and its
authors are supplying information but are not attempting to render engineering or other professional
services. If such services are required, the assistance of an appropriate professional should be sought.
Typeset at Transcend Content Solution, 163F Jaigirghat Road, Panchanantala, Kolkata – 700 063
Cover Designer: Yaman
Visit us at: www.mheducation.co.in
Write to us at: support.india@mheducation.com
CIN: U80302TN2010PTC111532
Toll Free Number: 1800 103 5875
=== PAGE 3 ===
5
Dedicated
to
My Wife
Mamadgi Vidya
and
My Daughters
Mamadgi Anjali
Mamadgi Aishwarya
and
My Native Place
Dhanasiri (Zaheerabad – Telangana)
=== PAGE 4 ===
6
About the Author
M Laxmikanth obtained his postgraduate degree in Political Science from Osmania University in 1989. He
is the former founder and director of an erstwhile coaching institute called Laxmikanth’s IAS Academy,
Hyderabad. Other books authored by him include Governance in India, Objective Indian Polity and Public
Administration.
Preface to the Eighth Edition
Iam pleased to announce the release of the latest edition of Indian Polity, now structured as a
comprehensive courseware. This edition features two new chapters on North Eastern Council and
Judgements Expanding the Scope of Article 21, over 40 Conceptual Videos, Preliminary questions for
2024–2025 with answer keys, and Main questions for 2023-2024—making it both timely and highly
relevant for aspirants.
Recognising that videos are now an integral part of the learning journey, we’ve included in-depth videos
on complex topics to help learners gain a clearer and deeper understanding of key concepts in Polity.
With these enhancements, I firmly believe this edition stands as a thoroughly updated and holistic
manual for civil services preparation. It is a matter of immense satisfaction that the previous seven
editions have received an overwhelmingly positive response from readers, and I am confident that this
edition will continue to earn your trust and support.
As always, constructive feedback and specific suggestions for improvement are most welcome and will
be sincerely appreciated.
M Laxmikanth
Preface to the First Edition
I have great pleasure in placing this book before the aspirants of the top administrative services. The
book has been written to meet the growing requirements of the candidates appearing for the Civil
Services Examinations (Preliminary and Main) conducted by the Union Public Service Commission. It
directly and fully covers the Indian Polity section of the paper on General Studies and is also useful for
certain optional subjects like Public Administration, Political Science, Law, Sociology and Anthropology.
This comprehensive volume would enable the readers to acquire a complete and detailed understanding
of the subject. It covers all dimensions (constitutional, non-constitutional, political and administrative) of
the subject. My first-hand experience of coaching the candidates for the Civil Services Examinations has
been a great source of inspiration and has helped me immensely in writing this book.
An effort has been made to make the contents of the book relevant, authentic, and up-to-date. The
constitutional provisions are explained in the light of the debates of the Constituent Assembly of India as
well as the judgements of the Supreme Court and the high courts. I have also used tables to make the
presentation more clear. The Appendices, provided at the end of the book, serve as a reference section.
I welcome all constructive comments and concrete suggestions from the readers of this book.
M Laxmikanth
Acknowledgements
=== PAGE 5 ===
7
During the course of writing this book, I have received help, encouragement and assistance from my
teachers, students, family members, colleagues, friends, library staff and others. I am thankful to all of
them.
I am particularly grateful to my wife, Smt. Mamadgi Vidya, for the encouragement and support that she
provided during the preparation of the book.
I am deeply indebted to the eminent political scientists and constitutional experts (Granville Austin,
Moris Jones, K.C. Wheare, Rajni Kothari, Paul Appleby, K. Santhanam, N.A. Palkhivala, Soli Sorabji, D.D.
Basu, V.N. Shukla, M.P. Jain, Subhash Kashyap) and other scholars of repute whose valuable works have
been highly useful in the writing of this book.
I have also used and included information, data, annual reports, other reports and
committee/commission reports available on the official websites of the various ministries, departments
and organisations of the Government of India. These include the Ministry of Home Affairs, Inter-State
Council Secretariat, Election Commission of India, Cabinet Secretariat, Lok Sabha Secretariat, Rajya
Sabha Secretariat, Digital Sansad, Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Indian
Parliamentary Group, Supreme Court of India, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions,
Ministry of Law and Justice, National Legal Services Authority, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and
Public Distribution, Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Ministry of Housing and
Urban Affairs, Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Union Public Service Commission, Finance Commission of India,
Goods and Services Tax Council, National Commission for SCs, National Commission for STs, National
Commission for BCs, Commissioner for Linguistic Minorities, Comptroller and Auditor General of India,
NITI Aayog, National Human Rights Commission, Central Information Commission, Central Vigilance
Commission, Central Bureau of Investigation, Lokpal, National Investigation Agency, National Disaster
Management Authority, Ministry of Culture, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, National
Foundation for Communal Harmony, Ministry of
External Affairs, Press Information Bureau, National Commission for Women, National Commission for
Protection of Child Rights, National Commission for Minorities, Ministry of Minority Affairs, Bar Council
of India, Law Commission of India, North Eastern Council and others.
The other sources of material were the news items and articles published in The Hindu, The Indian
Express, The Times of India, Yojana and Kurukshetra as well as the official websites of the Governments
of the USA, the UK, the France, the Japan, the Russia, the China and the Switzerland.
My thanks are also due to Tanweer Ahmad, Nikhil Wadhera, Pankaj Dwivedi and Mausumi Mukherjee of
McGraw Hill Education (India) Private Limited for their unstinted cooperation in bringing out this revised
edition on time.
M Laxmikanth
Year wise break up of UPSC Questions on Indian Polity (General Studies–Preliminary)
Sl.No. Year No. of Questions Asked
1. 2010 10
=== PAGE 6 ===
8
Sl.No. Year No. of Questions Asked
2. 2011 12
3. 2012 20
4. 2013 18
5. 2014 13
6. 2015 15
7. 2016 06
8. 2017 22
9. 2018 15
10. 2019 15
11. 2020 18
12. 2021 18
13. 2022 11
14. 2023 16
15. 2024 19
16. 2025 15
Note I: In 2011, the UPSC changed the pattern and syllabus of the Preliminary Examination. In the new scheme, the Indian Polity section has
been renamed as “Indian Polity and Governance”. It covers Constitution, Political System, Panchayati Raj, Public Policy, Rights Issues, etc. Also,
now each question carries two marks (previously one mark)Note II: In the above table, the number of questions asked on “Governance” (since
2011) are also included.
Year wise break up of UPSC Marks on Indian Polity (General Studies—Main)
Sl.No. Year No. of Marks Allotted
1. 2010 66
=== PAGE 7 ===
9
Sl.No. Year No. of Marks Allotted
2. 2011 111
3. 2012 47
4. 2013 100
5. 2014 88
6. 2015 100
7. 2016 112
8. 2017 110
9. 2018 125
10. 2019 125
11. 2020 125
12. 2021 125
13. 2022 125
14. 2023 125
15. 2024 110
Note I: In 2013, the UPSC changed the pattern and syllabus of the Main Examination. In the new scheme,
a separate and full paper on “Governance, Constitution, Polity, Social Justice and International Relations”
has been introduced. It carries 250 marks.
Note II: In the above table, the number of marks allotted to the questions relating to the “Governance,
Social Justice and International Relations” (since 2013) are not included.
UPSC Syllabus
Preliminary Examination
Paper-I (General Studies)
Indian Polity and Governance – Constitution, Political System, Panchayati Raj, Public Policy, Rights Issues,
etc.
MAIN EXAMINATION
Paper-II (General Studies-II)
(Governance, Constitution, Polity, Social Justice and International Relations)
• Indian Constitution – historical underpinnings, evolution, features, amendments, significant
provisions and basic structure
• Functions and responsibilities of the Union and the States, issues and challenges pertaining to
the federal structure, devolution of powers and finances up to local levels and challenges therein
• Separation of powers between various organs dispute redressal mechanisms and institutions
• Comparison of the Indian constitutional scheme with that of other countries
=== PAGE 8 ===
10
• Parliament and State Legislatures – structure, functioning, conduct of business, powers &
privileges and issues arising out of these
• Structure, organisation and functioning of the Executive and the Judiciary Ministries and
Departments of the Government; pressure groups and formal/informal associations and their
role in the Polity
• Salient features of the Representation of People’s Act
• Appointment to various Constitutional posts, powers, functions and responsibilities of various
Constitutional Bodies
• Statutory, regulatory and various quasi-judicial bodies
• Government policies and interventions for development in various sectors and issues arising out
of their design and implementation
• Development processes and the development industry – the role of NGOs, SHGs, various groups
and associations, donors, charities, institutional and other stakeholders
• Welfare schemes for vulnerable sections of the population by the Centre and States and the
performance of these schemes; mechanisms, laws, institutions and Bodies constituted for the
protection and betterment of these vulnerable sections
• Issues relating to development and management of Social Sector/Services relating to Health,
Education, Human Resources
• Issues relating to poverty and hunger
• Important aspects of governance, transparency and accountability, e-governance – applications,
models, successes, limitations, and potential; citizens charters, transparency & accountability
and institutional and other measures
• Role of civil services in a democracy
• India and its neighborhood – relations
• Bilateral, regional and global groupings and agreements involving India and/or affecting India’s
interests
• Effect of policies and politics of developed and developing countries on India’s interests, Indian
diaspora
• Important International institutions, agencies and fora – their structure, mandate
Note: This book focuses exclusively on topics relating to Indian Constitution and Political System and
does not include those topics that are covered in Laxmikanth’s Governance in India book.
=== PAGE 9 ===

=== PAGE 10 ===

=== PAGE 11 ===

=== PAGE 12 ===

=== PAGE 13 ===

=== PAGE 14 ===

=== PAGE 15 ===

=== PAGE 16 ===

=== PAGE 17 ===

=== PAGE 18 ===

=== PAGE 19 ===

=== PAGE 20 ===

=== PAGE 21 ===

=== PAGE 22 ===

=== PAGE 23 ===

=== PAGE 24 ===
24
In this Part...
1. 1. Historical Background
2. 2. Making of the Constitution
3. 3. Concept of the Constitution
4. 4. Salient Features of the Constitution
5. 5. Preamble of the Constitution
6. 6. Union and Its Territory
7. 7. Citizenship
8. 8. Fundamental Rights
9. 9. Directive Principles of State Policy
10. 10. Fundamental Duties
11. 11. Amendment of the Constitution
12. 12. Basic Structure of the Constitution
PART -I CONSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
=== PAGE 25 ===
25
CHAPTER 1 Historical Background
The Britishers came to India in 1608 as traders, in the form of the East India Company, which had the
exclusive right of trading in India under a charter granted by Queen Elizabeth I in 1600. In 1765, the
Company, which till then had purely trading functions, obtained the ‘diwani’ (i.e., rights over revenue
and civil justice) of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa1. This started its career as a territorial power. In 1858, in the
wake of the ‘sepoy mutiny’, the British Crown assumed direct responsibility for the governance of India.
This rule continued until India was granted independence on August 15, 1947.
With Independence came the need for a Constitution. Hence, a Constituent Assembly was formed for
this purpose in 1946 and on January 26, 1950, the Constitution came into being. However, various
features of the Indian Constitution and polity have their roots in the British rule. There were certain
events in the British rule that laid down the legal framework for the organisation and functioning of
government and administration in British India. These events have greatly influenced our constitution
and polity. They are explained here in a chronological order under two major headings:
1. The Company Rule (1773–1858)
2. The Crown Rule (1858–1947)
THE COMPANY RULE (1773–1858)
Regulating Act of 1773
This act was of great constitutional importance as (a) it was the first step taken by the British
Government to control and regulate the affairs of the East India Company in India; (b) it recognised, for
the first time, the political and administrative functions of the Company; and (c) it laid the foundations of
central administration in India.
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It designated the Governor of Bengal as the ‘Governor-General of Bengal’ and created an
Executive Council of four members to assist him. The first such Governor-General was Lord
Warren Hastings.
2. It made the Governors of Bombay and Madras presidencies subordinate to the Governor-
General of Bengal, unlike earlier, when the three presidencies were independent of one another.
3. It provided for the establishment of a Supreme Court at Calcutta (1774) comprising one chief
justice and three other judges.
4. It prohibited the servants of the Company from engaging in any private trade or accepting
presents or bribes from the ‘natives’.
5. It strengthened the control of the British Government over the Company by requiring the Court
of Directors (governing body of the Company) to report on its revenue, civil, and military affairs
in India.
=== PAGE 26 ===
26
Amending Act of 1781
In a bid to rectify the defects of the Regulating Act of 1773, the British Parliament passed the Amending
Act of 1781, also known as the Act of Settlement.
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It exempted the Governor-General and the Council from the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
for the acts carried out by them in their official capacity. Similarly, it also exempted the servants
of the Company from the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court for their official actions.
2. It excluded the revenue matters and the matters arising in the collection of revenue from the
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.
3. It provided that the Supreme Court was to have jurisdiction over all the inhabitants of Calcutta. It
also required the Court to administer the personal law of the defendants i.e., Hindus were to be
tried according to the Hindu law and Muslims were to be tried according to the Mohammedan
law.
4. It laid down that the appeals from the Provincial Courts could be taken to the Governor-General-
in-Council and not to the Supreme Court.
5. It empowered the Governor-General-in-Council to frame regulations for the Provincial Courts
and Councils.
Pitt’s India Act of 1784
The next important act was the Pitt’s India Act2 of 1784.
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It distinguished between the commercial and political functions of the Company.
2. It allowed the Court of Directors to manage the commercial affairs, but created a new body
called the Board of Control to manage the political affairs. Thus, it established a system of double
government.
3. It empowered the Board of Control to supervise and direct all operations of the civil and military
government or revenues of the British possessions in India.
Thus, the act was significant for two reasons: first, the Company’s territories in India were for the first
time called the ‘British possessions in India’; and second, the British Government was given the supreme
control over Company’s affairs and its administration in India.
Act of 1786
In 1786, Lord Cornwallis was appointed as the Governor-General of Bengal. He placed two demands to
accept that post, viz.,
=== PAGE 27 ===
27
1. He should be given power to override the decision of his council in special cases.
2. He would also be the Commander-in-Chief.
Accordingly, the Act of 1786 was enacted to make both the provisions.
Charter Act of 1793
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It extended the overriding power given to Lord Cornwallis over his council, to all future
Governor-Generals and Governors of Presidencies.
2. It gave the Governor-General more powers and control over the governments of the subordinate
Presidencies of Bombay and Madras.
3. It extended the trade monopoly of the Company in India for a period of another twenty years.
4. It provided that the Commander-in-Chief was not to be a member of the Governor-General’s
council, unless he was so appointed.
5. It laid down that the members of the Board of Control and their staff were, henceforth, to be
paid out of the Indian revenues.
Charter Act of 1813
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It abolished the trade monopoly of the Company in India i.e., the Indian trade was thrown open
to all British merchants. However, it continued the monopoly of the Company over trade in tea
and trade with China.
2. It asserted the sovereignty of the British Crown over the Company’s territories in India.
3. It allowed the Christian missionaries to come to India for the purpose of enlightening the people.
4. It provided for the spread of western education among the inhabitants of the British territories
in India.
5. It authorised the Local Governments in India to impose taxes on persons. They could also punish
the persons for not paying taxes.
Charter Act of 1833
This Act was the final step towards centralisation in British India.
The features of this Act were as follows:
=== PAGE 28 ===
28
1. It made the Governor-General of Bengal as the Governor-General of India and vested in him all
civil and military powers. Thus, the act vested, for the first time, the Government of India with
authority over the entire territorial area possessed by the British in India. Lord William Bentick
was the first Governor-General of India.
2. It deprived the Governor of Bombay and Madras of their legislative powers. The Governor-
General of India was given exclusive legislative powers for the entirety of British India. The laws
made under the previous acts were called as Regulations, while laws made under this act were
called as Acts.
3. It ended the activities of the East India Company as a commercial body, which became a purely
administrative body. It provided that the Company’s territories in India were held by it ‘in trust
for His Majesty, His heirs and successors’.
4. The Charter Act of 1833 attempted to introduce a system of open competition for selection of
civil servants and stated that the Indians should not be debarred from holding any place, office
and employment under the Company. However, this provision was negated after opposition
from the Court of Directors.
Charter Act of 1853
This was the last of the series of Charter Acts passed by the British Parliament between 1793 and 1853.
It was a significant constitutional landmark.
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It separated, for the first time, the legislative and executive functions of the Governor-General’s
council. It provided for the addition of six new members called legislative councillors to the
council. In other words, it established a separate Governor-General’s legislative council which
came to be known as the Indian (Central) Legislative Council. This legislative wing of the council
functioned as a mini-Parliament, adopting the same procedures as the British Parliament. Thus,
legislation, for the first time, was treated as a special function of the government, requiring
special machinery and special process.
2. It introduced an open competition system of selection and recruitment of civil servants. The
covenanted civil service3 was, thus, thrown open to the Indians also. Accordingly, the Macaulay
Committee (the Committee on the Indian Civil Service) was appointed in 1854.
3. It extended the Company’s rule and allowed it to retain the possession of Indian territories on
trust for the British Crown. But, it did not specify any particular period, unlike the previous
Charters. This was a clear indication that the Company’s rule could be terminated at any time the
Parliament liked.
4. It introduced, for the first time, local representation in the Indian (Central) Legislative Council. Of
the six new legislative members of the Governor-General’s council, four members were
appointed by the local (provincial) governments of Madras, Bombay, Bengal and Agra.
THE CROWN RULE (1858–1947)
=== PAGE 29 ===
29
Government of India Act of 1858
This significant Act was enacted in the wake of the Revolt of 1857—also known as the First War of
Independence or the ‘sepoy mutiny’. The act known as the Act for the Good Government of India,
abolished the East India Company, and transferred the powers of Government, territories and revenues
to the British Crown.
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It provided that India, henceforth, was to be governed by, and in the name of, Her Majesty. It
changed the designation of the Governor-General of India to that of Viceroy of India. He
(Viceroy) was the direct representative of the British Crown in India. Lord Canning, thus, became
the first Viceroy of India.
2. It ended the system of double Government by abolishing the Board of Control and Court of
Directors.
3. It created a new office, Secretary of State for India, vested with complete authority and control
over Indian administration. The secretary of state was a member of the British Cabinet and was
responsible ultimately to the British Parliament.
4. It established a 15-member council of India to assist the Secretary of State for India. The council
was an advisory body. The secretary of state was made the Chairman of the council.
5. It constituted the Secretary of State-in-Council as a body corporate, capable of suing and being
sued in India and in England.
It must be noted here that “the act in no substantial way altered the system of government that
prevailed in India but confined itself to the improvement of the machinery by which the Indian
Government was to be superintended and controlled in England”4.
Indian Councils Act of 1861
After the great revolt of 1857, the British Government felt the necessity of seeking cooperation of the
Indians in the administration of their country. In pursuance of this policy of association, three acts were
enacted by the British Parliament in 1861, 1892 and 1909. The Indian Councils Act of 1861 is an
important landmark in the constitutional and political history of India.
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It made a beginning of the representative institutions by associating Indians with the law-making
process. It, thus, provided that the Viceroy should nominate some Indians as non-official
members of his expanded council. In 1862, Lord Canning, the then Viceroy, nominated three
Indians to his legislative council—the Raja of Benaras, the Maharaja of Patiala and Sir Dinkar
Rao.
2. It initiated the process of decentralisation by restoring the legislative powers to the Bombay and
Madras Presidencies. It, thus, reversed the centralising tendency that started from the
Regulating Act of 1773 and reached its climax under the Charter Act of 1833. This policy of
=== PAGE 30 ===
30
legislative devolution resulted in the grant of almost complete internal autonomy to the
provinces in 1937.
3. It also provided for the establishment of new legislative councils for Bengal, North-western
Provinces and Punjab, which were established in 1862, 1886 and 1897, respectively.
4. It empowered the Viceroy to make rules and orders for the more convenient transaction of
business in the council. It also gave a recognition to the ‘portfolio’ system, introduced by Lord
Canning in 1859. Under this, a member of the viceroy’s council was made in-charge of one or
more departments of the Government and was authorised to issue final orders on behalf of the
council on matters of his department(s).
5. It empowered the Viceroy to issue ordinances, without the concurrence of the legislative
council, during an emergency. The life of such an ordinance was six months.
Indian Councils Act of 1892
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It increased the number of additional (non-official) members in the Central and provincial
legislative councils, but maintained the official majority in them.
2. It increased the functions of legislative councils and gave them the power of discussing the
budget5 and addressing questions to the executive.
3. It provided for the nomination of some non-official members of the (a) Central Legislative
Council by the Viceroy on the recommendation of the provincial legislative councils and the
Bengal Chamber of Commerce, and (b) that of the provincial legislative councils by the
Governors on the recommendation of the district boards, municipalities, universities, trade
associations, zamindars and chambers.
“The act made a limited and indirect provision for the use of election in filling up some of the non-official
seats both in the Central and provincial legislative councils. The word election was, however, not used in
the Act. The process was described as nomination made on the recommendation of certain bodies”6.
Indian Councils Act of 1909
This Act is also known as Morley-Minto Reforms (Lord Morley was the then Secretary of State for India
and Lord Minto was the then viceroy of India).
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It considerably increased the size of the legislative councils, both Central and Provincial. The
number of members in the Central legislative council was raised from 16 to 60. The number of
members in the provincial legislative councils was not uniform.
2. It retained official majority in the Central legislative council, but allowed the provincial legislative
councils to have non-official majority.
=== PAGE 31 ===
31
3. It enlarged the deliberative functions of the legislative councils at both levels. For example,
members were allowed to ask supplementary questions, move resolutions on the budget and so
on.
4. It provided (for the first time) for the association of Indians with the executive councils of the
viceroy and Governors. Satyendra Prasad Sinha became the first Indian to join the viceroy’s
executive council. He was appointed as the Law Member.
5. It introduced a system of communal representation for Muslims by accepting the concept of
‘separate electorate’. Under this, the Muslim members were to be elected only by Muslim
voters. Thus, the Act ‘legalised communalism’ and Lord Minto came to be known as the Father
of Communal Electorate.
6. It also provided for the separate representation of presidency corporations, chambers of
commerce, universities and zamindars.
Government of India Act of 1919
On August 20, 1917, the British Government declared, for the first time, that its objective was the
gradual introduction of responsible Government in India7.
The Government of India Act of 1919 was thus enacted, which came into force in 1921. This Act is also
known as Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms (Montagu was the Secretary of State for India and Lord
Chelmsford was the Viceroy of India).
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It provided for the classification of all the subjects of administration into two categories, namely,
the central subjects and the provincial subjects. This classification was done by the “Devolution
Rules” framed under the Act. These rules facilitated the delegation of authority from the centre
to the provinces. In this way, the Act relaxed the central control over the provinces. The central
and provincial legislatures were authorised to make laws on their respective list of subjects.
However, the structure of government continued to be centralised and unitary.
2. It further divided the provincial subjects into two parts—transferred and reserved. The
transferred subjects included public health, education, local self-government, agriculture etc.
while the reserved subjects included police, administration of justice, prisons, land revenue,
finance etc. The transferred subjects were to be administered by the Governor with the aid of
Ministers responsible to the legislative council. The reserved subjects, on the other hand, were
to be administered by the Governor and his executive council without being responsible to the
legislative council. This dual scheme of governance was known as ‘dyarchy’—a term derived
from the Greek word di-arche which means double rule. However, this experiment was largely
unsuccessful.
3. It introduced, for the first time, bicameralism and direct elections in the country. Thus, the
Indian legislative council was replaced by a bicameral legislature consisting of an Upper House
(Council of State) and a Lower House (Legislative Assembly). The majority of members of both
the Houses were chosen by direct election.
=== PAGE 32 ===
32
4. It required that the three of the six members of the Viceroy’s executive Council (other than the
Commander-in-Chief) were to be Indian.
5. It extended the principle of communal representation by providing separate electorates for
Sikhs, Indian Christians, Anglo-Indians and Europeans.
6. It granted franchise to a limited number of people on the basis of property, tax or other
qualifications.
7. It created a new office of the High Commissioner for India in London and transferred to him
some of the functions hitherto performed by the Secretary of State for India.
8. It provided for the establishment of a public service commission. Hence, a Central Public Service
Commission was set up in 1926 for recruiting civil servants8.
9. It separated, for the first time, provincial budgets from the Central budget and authorised the
provincial legislatures to enact their budgets.
10. It provided for the appointment of a statutory commission to inquire into and report on its
working after ten years of its coming into force.
11. It proposed the establishment of a Chamber of Princes (also known as Narendra Mandal). The
chamber was inagurated in 1921. It consisted of 120 members i.e., Princes of 108 states and 12
representatives of other states. It was headed by the Viceroy (Governor-General). It facilitated
the consultation and discussion on the matters of common interest.
Simon Commission In November 1927 (i.e., 2 years before the schedule), the British Government
announced the appointment of a seven-member statutory commission under the chairmanship of Sir
John Simon to report on the condition of India under its new Constitution. All the members of the
commission were British and hence, all the parties boycotted the commission. The commission
submitted its report in 1930 and recommended the abolition of dyarchy, extension of responsible
Government in the provinces, establishment of a federation of British India and princely states,
continuation of communal electorate and so on. To consider the proposals of the commission, the British
Government convened three round table conferences of the representatives of the British Government,
British India and Indian princely states. On the basis of these discussions, a ‘White Paper on
Consitutional Reforms’ was prepared and submitted for the consideration of the Joint Select Committee
of the British Parliament. The recommendations of this committee were incorporated (with certain
changes) in the next Government of India Act of 1935.
Communal Award In August 1932, Ramsay MacDonald, the British Prime Minister, announced a scheme
of representation of the minorities, which came to be known as the Communal Award. The award not
only continued separate electorates for the Muslims, Sikhs, Indian Christians, Anglo-Indians and
Europeans but also extended it to the depressed classes (Scheduled Castes). Gandhiji was distressed
over this extension of the principle of communal representation to the depressed classes and undertook
a fast unto death in Yerawada Jail (Poona) to get the award modified. At last, there was an agreement
between the Congress and Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the leader of the depressed classes. The agreement,
known as the Poona Pact, retained the Hindu joint electorate and gave reserved seats to the depressed
classes.
=== PAGE 33 ===
33
The British Government accepted the Poona Pact and modified the Communal Award in respect to the
depressed classes (Scheduled Castes). This means that the provisions of separate electorates for the
depressed classes were dropped from the scheme of representation contained in the Communal Award.
Subsequently, the provisions of the Poona Pact were incorporated in the next Government of India Act of
1935. In other words, the composition of the central and provincial legislatures under the 1935 Act was
based on this modified Communal Award.
Government of India Act of 1935
The Act marked a second milestone towards a completely responsible government in India. It was a
lengthy and detailed document having 321 Sections and 10 Schedules.
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It provided for the establishment of an All-India Federation consisting of provinces and princely
states as units. The Act divided the powers between the Centre and units in terms of three
lists—Federal List (for Centre, with 59 items), Provincial List (for provinces, with 54 items) and
the Concurrent List (for both, with 36 items). Residuary powers were given to the Viceroy
(Governor-General). However, the federation never came into being as the princely states did
not join it.
2. It abolished dyarchy in the provinces and introduced ‘provincial autonomy’ in its place. The
provinces were allowed to act as autonomous units of administration in their defined spheres.
Moreover, the Act introduced responsible Governments in provinces, that is, the Governor was
required to act with the advice of ministers responsible to the provincial legislature. This came
into effect in 1937 and was discontinued in 1939.
3. It provided for the adoption of dyarchy at the Centre. Consequently, the federal subjects were
divided into reserved subjects and transferred subjects. However, this provision of the Act did
not come into operation at all.
4. It introduced bicameralism in six out of eleven provinces. Thus, the legislatures of Bengal,
Bombay, Madras, Bihar, Assam and the United Provinces were made bicameral consisting of a
legislative council (upper house) and a legislative assembly (lower house). However, many
restrictions were placed on them.
5. It reserved a certain number of general seats for the depressed classes (Scheduled Castes). It
also extended the special representation to women and labour (workers).
6. It abolished the Council of India, established by the Government of India Act of 1858. The
secretary of state for India was provided with a team of advisors.
7. It extended franchise. About 14 per cent of the total population got the voting right.
8. It provided for the establishment of a Reserve Bank of India to control the currency and credit of
the country.
=== PAGE 34 ===
34
9. It provided for the establishment of not only a Federal Public Service Commission, but also a
Provincial Public Service Commission and Joint Public Service Commission for two or more
provinces.
10. It provided for the establishment of a Federal Court, which was set up in 1937.
11. It separated Burma (now Myanmar) from India.
12. It created two new provinces of Orissa and Sind.
13. It provided for safeguards to protect the interests of minorities.
14. It provided for the establishment of a Federal Railway Authority to look after the administration
of railways.
15. It provided for the appointment of an Auditor-General of India to audit the accounts of the
federation and the provinces.
Indian Independence Act of 1947
On February 20, 1947, the British Prime Minister Clement Atlee declared that the British rule in India
would end by June 30, 1948; after which the power would be transferred to responsible Indian hands.
This announcement was followed by the agitation by the Muslim League demanding partition of the
country. Again on June 3, 1947, the British Government made it clear that any Constitution framed by
the Constituent Assembly of India (formed in 1946) cannot apply to those parts of the country which
were unwilling to accept it. On the same day (June 3, 1947), Lord Mountbatten, the Viceroy of India, put
forth the partition plan, known as the Mountbatten Plan. The plan was accepted by the Congress and
the Muslim League. Immediate effect was given to the plan by enacting the Indian Independence
Act9 (1947).
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It ended the British rule in India and declared India as an independent state from August 15,
1947.
2. It provided for the partition of India and creation of two independent dominions of India and
Pakistan with the right to secede from the British Commonwealth.
3. It abolished the office of Viceroy and provided, for each dominion, a Governor-General, who was
to be appointed by the British King on the advice of the dominion cabinet. His Majesty’s
Government in Britain was to have no responsibility with respect to the Government of India or
Pakistan.
4. It empowered the Constituent Assemblies of the two dominions to frame and adopt any
constitution for their respective nations and to repeal any act of the British Parliament, including
the Independence act itself.
5. It empowered the Constituent Assemblies of both the dominions to legislate for their respective
territories till the new constitutions were drafted and enforced. No Act of the British Parliament
=== PAGE 35 ===
35
passed after August 15, 1947 was to extend to either of the new dominions unless it was
extended thereto by a law of the legislature of the dominion.
6. It abolished the office of the Secretary of State for India and transferred his functions to the
Secretary of State for Commonwealth Affairs.
7. It proclaimed the lapse of British paramountcy over the Indian princely states and treaty
relations with tribal areas from August 15, 1947.
8. It granted freedom to the Indian princely states either to join the Dominion of India or Dominion
of Pakistan or to remain independent.
9. It provided for the governance of each of the dominions and the provinces by the Government
of India Act of 1935, till the new Constitutions were framed. The dominions were, however,
authorised to make modifications in the Act.
10. It deprived the British Monarch of his right to veto bills or ask for reservation of certain bills for
his approval. But, this right was reserved for the Governor-General. The Governor-General would
have full power to assent to any bill in the name of His Majesty.
11. It designated the Governor-General of India and the provincial governors as constitutional
(nominal) heads of the states. They were made to act on the advice of the respective council of
ministers in all matters.
12. It dropped the title of Emperor of India from the royal titles of the King of England.
13. It discontinued the appointment to civil services and reservation of posts by the secretary of
state for India. The members of the civil services appointed before August 15, 1947 would
continue to enjoy all benefits that they were entitled to till that time.
At the stroke of midnight of 14–15 August, 1947, the British rule came to an end and power was
transferred to the two new independent Dominions of India and Pakistan10. Lord Mountbatten became
the first Governor-General of the new Dominion of India. He swore in Jawaharlal Nehru as the first Prime
Minister of independent India. The Constituent Assembly of India formed in 1946 became the Parliament
of the Indian Dominion.
The members of both, the Interim Government (1946) and the First Cabinet of Independent India (1947),
are mentioned in Tables 1.1 and 1.2 respectively.
Table 1.1 Interim Government (1946)
Sl.
No. Members Portfolios Held
1. Jawaharlal Nehru Vice-President of the Council; External Affairs and Commonwealth
Relations
=== PAGE 36 ===
36
Sl.
No. Members Portfolios Held
2. Sardar Vallabhbhai
Patel
Home, Information and Broadcasting
3. Dr. Rajendra Prasad Food and Agriculture
4. Dr. John Mathai Industries and Supplies
5. Jagjivan Ram Labour
6. Sardar Baldev Singh Defence
7. C.H. Bhabha Works, Mines and Power
8. Liaquat Ali Khan Finance
9. Abdur Rab Nishtar Posts and Air
10. Asaf Ali Railways and Transport
11. C. Rajagopalachari Education and Arts
12. I.I. Chundrigar Commerce
13. Ghaznafar Ali Khan Health
14. Jogendra Nath Mandal Law
Note: The members of the Interim Government were members of the Viceroy’s Executive Council. The
Viceroy continued to be the head of the Council. But, Jawaharlal Nehru was designated as the Vice-
President of the Council.
Table 1.2 First Cabinet of Independent India (1947)
=== PAGE 37 ===
37
Sl.
No. Members Portfolios Held
1. Jawaharlal Nehru Prime Minister; External Affairs and Commonwealth Relations;
Scientific Research
2. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel Home, Information and Broadcasting; States
3. Dr. Rajendra Prasad Food and Agriculture
4. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Education
5. Dr. John Mathai Railways and Transport
6. R.K. Shanmugham Chetty Finance
7. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Law
8. Jagjivan Ram Labour
9. Sardar Baldev Singh Defence
10. Raj Kumari Amrit Kaur Health
11. C.H. Bhabha Commerce
12. Rafi Ahmed Kidwai Communication
13. Dr. Shyama Prasad
Mukherjee
Industries and Supplies
14. V.N. Gadgil Works, Mines and Power
1The Mughal Emperor, Shah Alam, granted ‘Diwani’ to the Company after its victory in the Battle of Buxar
(1764).
2It was introduced in the British Parliament by the then Prime Minister, William Pitt.
=== PAGE 38 ===
38
3At that time, the Civil Services of the company were classified into covenanted civil services (higher civil
services) and uncovenanted civil services (lower civil services). The former was created by a law of the
Company, while the later was created otherwise.
4M. V. Pylee, Constitutional History of India, S. Chand & Company Ltd., New Delhi, Fifth Edition, 2011, p.
16.
5The system of Budget was introduced in British India in 1860.
6V. N. Shukla, The Constitution of India, Eastern Book Company, Tenth Edition, 2001, p. A-10.
7The declaration thus stated: ‘The policy of His Majesty’s Government is that of the increasing
association of Indians in every branch of the administration, and the gradual development of self-
government institutions, with a view to the progressive realisation of responsible government in India as
an integral part of the British Empire’.
8This was done on the recommendation of the Lee Commission on Superior Civil Services in India (1923–
24).
9The Indian Independence Bill was introduced in the British Parliament on July 4, 1947 and received the
Royal Assent on July 18, 1947. The act came into force on August 15, 1947.
10The boundaries between the two Dominions were determined by a Boundary Commission headed by
Radcliff. Pakistan included the provinces of West Punjab, Sind, Baluchistan, East Bengal, North-Western
Frontier Province and the district of Sylhet in Assam. The referendum in the North-Western Frontier
Province and Sylhet was in favour of Pakistan.
=== PAGE 39 ===
39
CHAPTER 2 Making of the Constitution
Demand for a Constituent Assembly
It was in 1934 that the idea of a Constituent Assembly for India was put forward for the first time by
M.N. Roy, a pioneer of the communist movement in India. In 1935, the Indian National Congress (INC),
for the first time, officially demanded a Constituent Assembly to frame the Constitution of India. In 1938,
Jawaharlal Nehru, on behalf of the INC declared that ‘the Constitution of free India must be framed,
without outside interference, by a Constituent Assembly elected on the basis of adult franchise’. This
view was endorsed and reiterated by the INC by passing a resolution in 1939.
The demand was finally accepted in principle by the British Government in what is known as the ‘August
Offer’ of 1940. In 1942, Sir Stafford Cripps, a Member of the Cabinet, came to India with a draft proposal
of the British Government on the framing of an independent Constitution to be adopted after World War
II. The Cripps Proposals were rejected by the Muslim League, which wanted India to be divided into two
autonomous states with two separate Constituent Assemblies. Finally, a Cabinet Mission1 was sent to
India. While it rejected the idea of two Constituent Assemblies, it put forth a scheme for the Constituent
Assembly which more or less satisfied the Muslim League.
COMPOSITION OF THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY
The Constituent Assembly was constituted in November 1946 under the scheme formulated by the
Cabinet Mission Plan.
The features of the scheme were:
1. The total strength of the Constituent Assembly was to be 389. Of these, 296 seats were to be
allotted to British India and 93 seats to the princely states. Out of 296 seats allotted to British
India, 292 members were to be drawn from the eleven governors’ provinces2 and four from the
four Chief Commissioners’ provinces3, one from each.
2. Each province and princely state (or group of states in case of small states) were to be allotted
seats in proportion to their respective population. Roughly, one seat was to be allotted for every
million population.
3. Seats allocated to each British province were to be divided among the three principal
communities—Muslims, Sikhs and General (all except Muslims and Sikhs), in proportion to their
population.
4. The representatives of each community were to be elected by members of that community in
the provincial legislative assembly and voting was to be by the method of proportional
representation by means of single transferable vote.
=== PAGE 40 ===
40
5. The representatives of the princely states were to be nominated by the heads of the princely
states.
It is, thus, clear that the Constituent Assembly was to be a partly elected and partly nominated body.
Moreover, the members were to be indirectly elected by the members of the provincial assemblies, who
themselves were elected on a limited franchise4.
The elections to the Constituent Assembly (for 296 seats allotted to the British Indian Provinces) were
held in July–August 1946. The Indian National Congress won 208 seats, the Muslim League 73 seats and
the small groups and independents got the remaining 15 seats. However, the 93 seats allotted to the
princely states were not filled as they decided to stay away from the Constituent Assembly.
Although the Constituent Assembly was not directly elected by the people of India on the basis of adult
franchise, the Assembly comprised representatives of all sections of Indian society—Hindus, Muslims,
Sikhs, Parsis, Anglo–Indians, Indian Christians, SCs, STs including women of all these sections. The
Assembly included all important personalities of India at that time, with the exception of Mahatma
Gandhi.
The allocation of seats in the Constituent Assembly, the results of the elections to the Constituent
Assembly, the community-wise representation in the Constituent Assembly and the women members of
the Constituent Assembly are mentioned in Tables 2.1, 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4 respectively.
WORKING OF THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY
The Constituent Assembly held its first meeting on December 9, 1946. The Muslim League boycotted the
meeting and insisted on a separate state of Pakistan. The meeting was, thus, attended by only 207
members. Dr. Sachchidananda Sinha, the oldest member, was elected as the temporary Chairman of the
Assembly, following the French practice.
On December 11, 1946, Dr. Rajendra Prasad was elected as the permanent Chairman (President) of the
Assembly. Similarly, on January 25, 1947, H.C. Mukherjee was elected as the Vice-President of the
Assembly. Later on, the Assembly resolved to have two Vice-Presidents. Accordingly, on July 16, 1947,
V. T. Krishnamachari was elected as the second Vice-President of the Assembly.
Objectives Resolution
On December 13, 1946, Jawaharlal Nehru moved the historic ‘Objectives Resolution’ in the Assembly. It
laid down the fundamentals and philosophy of the constitutional structure. It read:
1. This Constituent Assembly declares its firm and solemn resolve to proclaim India as an
Independent Sovereign Republic and to draw up for her future governance a Constitution
2. Wherein the territories that now comprise British India, the territories that now form the Indian
States and such other parts of India as are outside India and the States as well as other
territories as are willing to be constituted into the independent sovereign India, shall be a Union
of them all; and
3. Wherein the said territories, whether with their present boundaries or with such others as may
be determined by the Constituent Assembly and thereafter according to the law of the
=== PAGE 41 ===
41
Constitution, shall possess and retain the status of autonomous units together with residuary
powers and exercise all powers and functions of Government and administration save and
except such powers and functions as are vested in or assigned to the Union or as are inherent or
implied in the Union or resulting therefrom; and
4. Wherein all power and authority of the sovereign independent India, its constituent parts and
organs of Government are derived from the people; and
5. Wherein shall be guaranteed and secured to all the people of India justice, social, economic and
political; equality of status of opportunity, and before the law; freedom of thought, expression,
belief, faith, worship, vocation, association and action, subject to law and public morality; and
6. Wherein adequate safeguards shall be provided for minorities, backward and tribal areas, and
depressed and other backward classes; and
7. Whereby shall be maintained the integrity of the territory of the Republic and its sovereign
rights on land, sea and air according to justice and the law of civilized nations; and
8. This ancient land attains its rightful and honoured place in the world and makes its full and
willing contribution to the promotion of world peace and the welfare of mankind.”
This Resolution was unanimously adopted by the Assembly on January 22, 1947. It influenced the
eventual shaping of the constitution through all its subsequent stages. Its modified version forms the
Preamble of the present Constitution.
Changes by the Independence Act
The representatives of the princely states, who had stayed away from the Constituent Assembly,
gradually joined it. On April 28, 1947, representatives of the six states5 were part of the Assembly. After
the acceptance of the Mountbatten Plan of June 3, 1947, for the partition of the country, the
representatives of most of the other princely states took their seats in the Assembly. The members of
the Muslim League from the Indian Dominion also entered the Assembly.
The Indian Independence Act of 1947 made the following three changes in the position of the Assembly:
1. The Assembly was made a fully sovereign body, which could frame any Constitution it pleased.
The act empowered the Assembly to abrogate or alter any law made by the British Parliament in
relation to India.
2. The Assembly also became a legislative body. In other words, two separate functions were
assigned to the Assembly, that is, making of the Constitution for free India and enacting of
ordinary laws for the country. These two tasks were to be performed on separate days. Thus, the
Assembly became the first Parliament of free India (Dominion Legislature). Whenever the
Assembly met as the Constituent body it was chaired by Dr. Rajendra Prasad and when it met as
the legislative body6, it was chaired by G.V. Mavlankar. These two functions continued till
November 26, 1949, when the task of making the Constitution was over.
3. The Muslim League members (hailing from the areas7 included in the Pakistan) withdrew from
the Constituent Assembly for India. Consequently, the total strength of the Assembly came down
=== PAGE 42 ===
42
to 299 as against 389 originally fixed in 1946 under the Cabinet Mission Plan. The strength of the
Indian provinces (formerly British Provinces) was reduced from 296 to 229 and those of the
princely states from 93 to 70. The state-wise membership of the Assembly as on December 31,
1947, is shown in Table 2.5.
Other Functions Performed
In addition to the making of the Constitution and enacting of ordinary laws, the Constituent Assembly
also performed the following functions:
1. It ratified India’s membership of the Commonwealth in May 1949.
2. It adopted the national flag on July 22, 1947.
3. It adopted the national anthem on January 24, 1950.
4. It adopted the national song on January 24, 1950.
5. It elected Dr. Rajendra Prasad as the first President of India on January 24, 1950.
In all, the Constituent Assembly had 11 sessions over two years, 11 months and 18 days. The
Constitution-makers had gone through the Constitutions of about 60 countries, and the Draft
Constitution was considered for 114 days. The total expenditure incurred on making the Constitution
amounted to ₹64 lakh.
On January 24, 1950, the Constituent Assembly held its final session. It, however, did not end, and
continued as the provisional parliament of India from January 26, 1950, till the formation of new
Parliament8 after the first general elections in 1951–52.
The complete list of the sessions of the Constituent Assembly is given in Table 2.6.
COMMITTEES OF THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY
The Constituent Assembly appointed a number of committees to deal with different tasks of
constitution-making. Out of these, eight were major committees and the others were minor committees.
The names of these committees and their Chairman are given below:
Major Committees
1. Union Powers Committee – Jawaharlal Nehru
2. Union Constitution Committee – Jawaharlal Nehru
3. Provincial Constitution Committee – Sardar Patel
4. Drafting Committee – Dr. B.R. Ambedkar
5. Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded Areas – Sardar
Patel. This committee had the following five sub-committees:
=== PAGE 43 ===
43
(a) Fundamental Rights Sub-Committee – J.B. Kripalani
(b) Minorities Sub-Committee – H.C. Mukherjee
(c) North-East Frontier Tribal Areas and Assam Excluded & Partially Excluded Areas Sub-Committee –
Gopinath Bardoloi
(d) Excluded and Partially Excluded Areas (other than those in Assam) Sub-Committee – A.V. Thakkar
(e) North-West Frontier Tribal Areas Sub-Committee8a
6. Rules of Procedure Committee – Dr. Rajendra Prasad
7. States Committee (Committee for Negotiating with States) – Jawaharlal Nehru
8. Steering Committee – Dr. Rajendra Prasad
Minor Committees
1. Finance and Staff Committee – Dr. Rajendra Prasad
2. Credentials Committee – Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar
3. House Committee – B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya
4. Order of Business Committee – Dr. K.M. Munshi
5. Ad-hoc Committee on the National Flag – Dr. Rajendra Prasad
6. Committee on the Functions of the Constituent Assembly – G.V. Mavalankar
7. Ad-hoc Committee on the Supreme Court – S. Varadachari (Not an Assembly Member)
8. Committee on Chief Commissioners’ Provinces – B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya
9. Expert Committee on the Financial Provisions of the Union Constitution – Nalini Ranjan Sarkar
(Not an Assembly Member)
10. Linguistic Provinces Commission – S.K. Dar (Not an Assembly Member)
11. Special Committee to Examine the Draft Constitution – Jawaharlal Nehru
12. Press Gallery Committee – Usha Nath Sen
13. Ad-hoc Committee on Citizenship – S. Varadachari (Not an Assembly Member)
Drafting Committee
Among all the committees of the Constituent Assembly, the most important committee was the Drafting
Committee set up on August 29, 1947. It was this committee that was entrusted with the task of
preparing a draft of the new Constitution. It consisted of seven members. They were:
=== PAGE 44 ===
44
1. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar (Chairman)
2. N. Gopalaswamy Ayyangar
3. Alladi Krishnaswamy Ayyar
4. Dr. K.M. Munshi
5. Syed Mohammad Saadullah
6. N. Madhava Rau (He replaced B.L. Mitter who resigned due to ill-health)
7. T.T. Krishnamachari (He replaced D.P. Khaitan who died in 1948)
The Drafting Committee, after taking into consideration the proposals of the various committees,
prepared the first draft of the Constitution of India, which was published in February, 1948. The people
of India were given eight months to discuss the draft and propose amendments. In light of the public
comments, criticisms and suggestions, the Drafting Committee prepared a second draft, which was
published in October, 1948.
The Drafting Committee took less than six months to prepare its draft. In all it sat only for 141 days.
ENACTMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar introduced the final draft of the Constitution in the Assembly on November 4, 1948
(first reading). The Assembly had a general discussion on it for five days (till November 9, 1948).
The second reading (clause by clause consideration) started on November 15, 1948, and ended on
October 17, 1949. During this stage, as many as 7653 amendments were proposed and 2473 were
actually discussed in the Assembly.
The third reading of the draft started on November 14, 1949. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar moved a motion—‘the
Constitution as settled by the Assembly be passed’. The motion on Draft Constitution was declared as
passed on November 26, 1949, and received the signatures of the members and the president. Out of a
total 299 members of the Assembly, only 284 were actually present on that day and signed the
Constitution. This is also the date mentioned in the Preamble as the date on which the people of India in
the Constituent Assembly adopted, enacted and gave to themselves this Constitution.
The Constitution as adopted on November 26, 1949, contained a Preamble, 395 Articles and 8
Schedules. The Preamble was enacted after the entire Constitution was already enacted.
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the then Law Minister, piloted the Draft Constitution in the Assembly. He took a very
prominent part in the deliberations of the Assembly. He was known for his logical, forceful and
persuasive arguments on the floor of the Assembly. He is recognised as the ‘Father of the Constitution of
India’. This brilliant writer, constitutional expert and undisputed leader of the Scheduled Castes is also
known as the ‘chief architect of the Constitution of India’.
On November 19, 2015, the Government of India has decided to celebrate the November 26 of every
year as the “Constitution Day” (“Samvidhan Divas”) to promote constitutional values among citizens.
ENFORCEMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION
=== PAGE 45 ===
45
Some provisions of the Constitution pertaining to citizenship, elections, provisional parliament,
temporary and transitional provisions, and short title contained in Articles 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 60, 324, 366, 367,
379, 380, 388, 391, 392 and 393 came into force on November 26, 1949, itself.
The remaining provisions (the major part) of the Constitution came into force on January 26, 1950. This
day is referred to in the Constitution as the ‘date of its commencement’, and celebrated as the Republic
Day.
January 26 was specifically chosen as the ‘date of commencement’ of the Constitution because of its
historical importance. It was on this day in 1930 that Purna Swaraj day was celebrated, following the
resolution of the Lahore Session (December 1929) of the INC.
With the commencement of the Constitution, the Indian Independence Act of 1947 and the Government
of India Act of 1935, with all enactments amending or supplementing the latter Act, were repealed. The
Abolition of Privy Council Jurisdiction Act (1949) was however continued.
EXPERTS COMMITTEE OF THE CONGRESS
While elections to the Constituent Assembly were still in progress, on July 8, 1946, the Congress Party
(Indian National Congress) appointed an Experts Committee for the purpose of preparing material for
the Constituent Assembly. This committee consisted of the following members8b:
1. Jawaharlal Nehru (Chairman)
2. M. Asaf Ali
3. K.M. Munshi
4. N. Gopalaswami Ayyangar
5. K.T. Shah
6. D.R. Gadgil
7. Humayun Kabir
8. K. Santhanam
Later, on the Chairman’s proposal, it was resolved that Krishna Kripalani be co-opted as member and
convener of the committee.
The committee had two sittings, the first at New Delhi from July 20 to 22, 1946, and the second at
Bombay from August 15 to 17, 1946.
Apart from a number of notes prepared by its members, the committee discussed the procedure to be
adopted by the Constituent Assembly, the question of the appointment of various committees and the
draft of a resolution on the objectives of the constitution to be moved during the first session of the
Constituent Assembly.8c
On the role played by this committee in the making of the Constitution, Granville Austin, an American
constitutional expert, observed: “It was the Congress Experts Committee that set India on the road to
her present Constitution. The committee members, working within the framework of the Cabinet