
--- [PDF PAGE 112] ---
President
Seventeen
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	When the President of India is to be impeached for violation of the Constitution, the charge
shall be preferred by either House of Parliament.
2. 	An election to fill a vacancy in the office of President of India occurring by reason of his
death, resignation or removal or otherwise shall be held in no case later than nine months from
the date of occurrence of the vacancy.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The President nominates twelve members of the Rajya Sabha on the advice of the Council of
Ministers.
2. 	The President has absolute power to appoint and remove the Chairman and members of
statutory bodies at his discretion.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 113] ---
III.6 | Objective Indian Polity
3. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	On the expiry of the term of five years by the President of India, the outgoing President must
continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.
2. 	The Electoral College for the President’s election consists of the elected members of the
Legislative Assemblies of Delhi and Puducherry also.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
4. 	The Executive power of the Union Government is vested in the President of India. The President
shall exercise these powers:
(a) 	Himself
(b) 	Directly or through officers subordinate to him if he so desires
(c) 	Either directly or through officers subordinate to him in accordance with the provisions of
the Constitution
(d) 	Only on the advice of Prime Minister
5. 	Which one of the following statements is correct?
(a) 	The Chief Election Commissioner of India holds his office during the pleasure of President
(b) 	The Governor of a State holds his office during the pleasure of the President
(c) 	The Prime Minister can only be removed by a resolution passed by both Houses of Parliament
(d) 	The speaker of the Lok Sabha can be removed at the pleasure of the President
6. 	In which of the following cases the President of India is not bound by the advice of the Council
of Ministers?
1. 	The choice of the Prime Minister
2. 	The dismissal of a Government which refuses to quit, after having lost its majority in the
House of the People
3. 	The allocation of business
4. 	The dissolution of the House, when appeal to the electorate becomes necessary
Choose the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 1, 2 and 4
(c) 	1, 3 and 4 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
7. 	Which of the following statements is not correct?
(a) 	There shall be a Council of Ministers headed by the Prime Minister to aid and advise the
President who shall act in accordance with such advice.
(b) 	The President may require the Council of Ministers to reconsider such advice
(c) 	The President need not act in accordance with the advice tendered after such reconsideration
(d) 	The President shall act in accordance with the advice tendered after such reconsideration
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 114] ---
President | III.7
8. 	Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Power of President) 	(Relevant Provision)
A. 	Power to grant pardon 	1. 	Article 76
B. 	Executive power of the Union 	2. 	Article 75
C. 	Power to appoint Prime Minister 	3. 	Article 53
D. 	Appointment of Attorney-General 	4. 	Article 72
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	4 	2 	3 	1
(b) 	4 	3 	2 	1
(c) 	1 	2 	3 	4
(d) 	1 	3 	2 	4
9. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The President can commute death sentence to life imprisonment.
2. 	The Governor cannot commute death sentence to life imprisonment.
3. 	The President’s power to pardon extends to punishments or sentences by court martial.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	2 only 	(b) 1 and 3 only
(c) 	1, 2 and 3 	(d) 2 and 3 only
10. Assertion (A): President of India is the Chief Executive of Government of India.
Reason (R): 	President of India is elected by the elected members of Parliament and elected
members of state legislative assemblies.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
11. In which one of the following cases, is the President of India not bound by the aid and advice of
the Union Council of Ministers?
(a) 	In deciding the question of removal of a Governor
(b) 	In deciding the question whether a member of Lok Sabha has become disqualified to continue
as a member
(c) 	While exercising power to grant pardon
(d) 	In dismissing a civil servant without any enquiry and hearing on the ground of security of
state
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 115] ---
III.8 | Objective Indian Polity
12. Money can be advanced out of the Contingency Fund of India to meet unforeseen expenditure by
the
(a) 	Parliament 	(b) President
(c) 	Finance Minister 	(d) Prime Minister
13. Consider the following statements:
The charge of violation of the Constitution by the President of India for his impeachment cannot
be preferred by a House unless:
1. 	A resolution containing the proposal is moved after a seven days’ notice in writing signed by
not less than 1/4th of the total number of the members of that House.
2. 	The resolution is passed by a majority of not less than 2/3rd of the total membership of that
House.
Which of the statement(s) given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
14. The Constitution (Forty-Second Amendment) Act, 1976, made it obligatory for the President of
India to act in accordance with the advice of the Council of Ministers.
For the above purpose, which one of the following Articles of the Constitution of India was
amended by the Constitution (Forty-Second Amendment) Act, 1976?
(a) 	Article 73 	(b) Article 74
(c) 	Article 75 	(d) Article 77
15. Assertion (A): The President of India has the power to grant pardon, reprieve, respite or
remission of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute sentence.
Reason (R): 	The President exercises not only executive functions but also judicial and legislative
functions.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
16. Which of the following is a correct statement about the President of India?
(a) 	He can address both Houses of Parliament, can summon the Houses of Parliament and can
send messages to either House of Parliament
(b) 	He can summon the Houses of Parliament but cannot send messages to either House of
Parliament
(c) 	He can send messages to either House of Parliament, but cannot summon the Houses of
Parliament
(d) 	He cannot send messages to either House of Parliament or summon the Houses of Parliament
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 116] ---
President | III.9
17. The President of India:
(a) 	Can be a member of Parliament
(b) 	Is part of Parliament
(c) 	Cannot stand for election for more than two terms
(d) 	Presides over joint sittings of both the Houses of Parliament
18. Which one of the following statements about the impeachment of the President of India is not
correct?
(a) 	The charge for violation of the Constitution shall be preferred by either House of Parliament.
(b) 	The resolution has to be moved after at least thirty days’ notice in writing.
(c) 	The resolution has to be signed by not less than one-fourth of the total number of members
of the House.
(d) 	The resolution has to be passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the total
membership of the House.
19. Which one of the following propositions is a correct description of the powers of the President
of India under Article 356 of the Constitution?
(a) 	If the Chief Minister inspite of commanding the confidence of the Legislative Assembly,
cannot run his government in accordance with the Constitution, the President can proclaim
emergency.
(b) 	If the law and order in a state completely breaks-down, the President can proclaim emergency.
(c) 	The President can refer the matter to the Supreme Court for advice and act in accordance
with such advice.
(d) 	The President cannot make a proclamation of emergency if the governor refuses to make a
report.
20. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Articles) 	(Contents)
A. 	Article 61 	1. 	The President of India
B. 	Article 54 	2. 	Term of President’s Office
C. 	Article 52 	3. 	Impeachment of President
D. 	Article 56 	4. 	Election of President
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	3 	2 	4 	1
(b) 	2 	4 	1 	3
(c) 	2 	1 	3 	4
(d) 	3 	4 	1 	2
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 117] ---
III.10 | Objective Indian Polity
21. The rule of passing resolution by two-thirds majority of total number of members of the House
of Parliament is applicable is case of:
(a) 	Amendment of the Constitution
(b) 	Approval of proclamation of emergency
(c) 	Impeachment of the President
(d) 	Disapproval of proclamation of emergency
22. Assertion (A): No public expenditure can be incurred except with the sanction of the Parliament.
Reason (R): 	During an emergency, the President of India is empowered to authorize the
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
23. As per provisions of the Constitution of India, who makes rules for more convenient transaction
of the business of the Government of India, and for allocation among Ministers of the said busi-
ness?
(a) 	The President
(b) 	The Union Law Minister
(c) 	The Attorney-General of India
(d) 	The Cabinet Secretariat
24. Which one of the following statements is correct?
On receipt of a Constitutional Amendment Bill after its passing by each House of the Parliament,
the President:
(a) 	Shall give his assent
(b) 	May give his assent
(c) 	May withhold his assent
(d) 	May return the Bill for reconsideration
25. “The President may require the Council of Ministers to reconsider the advice tendered by the lat-
ter and shall act in accordance with the advice tendered after such reconsideration.”
The above provision was inserted in the Indian Constitution by the:
(a) 	38th Amendment 	(b) 42nd Amendment
(c) 	44th Amendment 	(d) 52nd Amendment
26. Assertion (A): The President of India can return any bill passed by Parliament for reconsideration
of the Houses.
Reason (R): 	The President cannot return money bills to the Parliament for reconsideration of
the Houses.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 118] ---
President | III.11
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
27. Which one of the following is not correct about the powers of the President of India to grant
pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the
sentence of any person convicted of any offence?
(a) 	The President can do so in all cases where the punishment or sentence is by a Court Martial.
(b) 	The President may exercise such powers in all cases where punishment or sentence is for an
offence against any law falling within the executive power of the Union.
(c) 	The President may exercise such powers in all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death.
(d) 	The President may reject a petition for mercy but he must hear a petition for mercy before
rejecting.
28. Which one of the following statements about the executive powers of the President is incorrect?
(a) 	All important appointments are made by the President on the advice of the Council of
Ministers.
(b) 	The Prime Minister and all Union Ministers are appointed by the President.
(c) 	The President has the absolute power to appoint and remove the chairmen and the members
of statutory bodies at his discretion.
(d) 	The President is the supreme commander of the Armed Forces.
29. The President of India is elected by the ‘Electoral College’ consisting of
(a) 	All Members of Parliament.
(b) 	Elected Members of Parliament and State Legislative Assemblies.
(c) 	Members of Parliament, State Legislative Assemblies and Legislative Councils.
(d) 	All the Members of Parliament and State Legislative Assemblies.
30. Consider the following statements:
1. 	If a Bill other than Money Bill is returned by the President for reconsideration of the Houses
and the Bill is again passed by both the Houses of Parliament with or without amendments
and again presented to the President, then also it is not obligatory upon him to declare his
assent to it.
2. 	A Bill for the purpose of formation of new States and alteration of areas, boundaries or names
of existing States can be introduced in either House of Parliament and no recommendation of
the President is required for the introduction of such a Bill.
Which of the statement(s) given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 119] ---
III.12 | Objective Indian Polity
31. Assertion (A): The President of India is indirectly elected.
Reason (R): 	Under a parliamentary system of government, the head of the state is only a
nominal head.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
32. The authority to declare war or peace under the Indian Constitutions is vested in:
(a) 	The Prime Minister
(b) 	The Defence Minister
(c) 	The Parliament
(d) 	The President
33. Which one of the following statements is correct?
(a) 	The President may continue to be a member of Parliament even after assuming charge of
Presidential office.
(b) 	The President is not barred from holding any other office of profit even after assuming
charge of Presidential office.
(c) 	The President is entitled to use his official residence only on payment of the rent fixed.
(d) 	The emoluments and allowances of the President shall not be diminished during his term of
office.
34. Which one of the following is not a constitutional prerogative of the President of India?
(a) 	Returning a Legislative Bill for reconsideration(b) Returning a Money Bill for reconsideration
(c) 	Dissolving the Lok Sabha 	(d) Summoning the Rajya Sabha
35. Consider the following statements relating to the President of India:
1. 	He may resign by writing to the Vice-President.
2. 	He shall continue, not withstanding the expiration of his term, to hold office until his successor
enters upon his office.
3. 	He is not entitled to hold the office for more than two terms.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 	1 and 3 only 	(b) 1 and 2 only
(c) 	1, 2 and 3 	(d) 2 and 3 only
36. Assertion (A): The President of India occupies almost the same position as the King or Queen
of England.
Reason (R): 	The President is ultimately bound to act in accordance with the advice given by
the Council of Ministers.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 120] ---
President | III.13
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
37. The President of India is not the authority for the appointment of:
(a) 	Judges of the High Courts
(b) 	State Governors
(c) 	Union Ministers
(d) 	Chairman of a State Public Service Commission
38. Who among the following do not participate in the election of the President of India?
(a) 	Elected Members of the Rajya Sabha 	(b) Elected Members of the Lok Sabha
(c) 	Elected Members of the Vidhan Sabhas 	(d) Elected Members of the Vidhan Parishads
39. Assertion (A): The President is part of the Parliament.
Reason (R): 	A bill passed by the two Houses of Parliament cannot become law without the
assent of the President.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
40. Once the proclamation of emergency is made, the right of a citizen to move the Supreme Court
for enforcement of his fundamental rights is suspended by the:
(a) 	Prime Minister of India 	(b) President of India
(c) 	Speaker of the Lok Sabha 	(d) Chief Justice of India
41. Which one of the following is not correct regarding the executive powers of the President?
(a) 	He must be kept informed by the Prime Minister of all decisions of the Cabinet.
(b) 	He presides over the meetings of the Council of Ministers when he deems fit.
(c) 	He can ask the Prime Minister to submit a decision of any minister for the consideration of
the Council of Ministers.
(d) 	He must be supplied with such other information about the administration of the country as
he asks for it.
42. Assertion (A): The President of India can issue a proclamation of emergency under Article 352
on the advice of the Prime Minister.
Reason (R): 	When a proclamation of emergency is in operation, the President may suspend
the operation of all the fundamental rights except Articles 20 and 21.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 121] ---
III.14 | Objective Indian Polity
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
43. The power of the President of India to issue an ordinance is a / an:
(a) 	Executive power 	(b) Legislative power
(c) 	Constituent power 	(d) Quasi-judicial power
44. The impeachment of the President of India can be initiated in:
(a) 	Either House of Parliament 	(b) A joint sitting of both Houses of Parliament
(c) 	The Lok Sabha alone 	(d) The Rajya Sabha alone
45. Who amongst the following decides about the disqualification of the Members of Parliament?
(a) 	Election Commission 	(b) Supreme Court
(c) 	Speaker 	(d) President of India
46. Assertion (A): The Constitution vests the executive powers of the Union in the President of
India.
Reason (R): 	President of India is the Constitutional head of the State.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
47. When the President of India is satisfied that the financial credit of Government of India is threat-
ened, he may:
(a) 	Direct reduction in the number of members in the Finance Commission
(b) 	Proclaim financial emergency
(c) 	Impose President’s Rule in any State
(d) 	Direct Parliament to pass a special Financial Bill.
48. In the event of occurrence of vacancies in the offices of both, the President and the Vice-Presi-
dent of India, who among the following shall discharge the functions of the President till a new
President is elected?
(a) 	Speaker of the Lok Sabha
(b) 	Leader of the majority party in the Lok Sabha
(c) 	Chief Justice of India
(d) 	Seniormost Governor
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 122] ---
President | III.15
49. The President of India has power to declare emergency under Article 352 on which of the follow-
ing grounds?
1. 	War
2. 	Internal disturbance
3. 	External aggression
4. 	Armed rebellion
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 1, 3 and 4
(c) 	1, 2 and 4 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
50. Consider the following statements in respect of an Ordinance promulgated by the President of
India during recess of Parliament:
1. 	Such an Ordinance may be withdrawn at any time by the President.
2. 	Such an Ordinance shall be laid before both the Houses of Parliament and shall cease to
operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of Parliament, or before that
period if disapproved by both the Houses.
Which of the statement(s) given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
51. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Pardoning Power of President) 	(Implications)
A. 	Commutation 	1. 	Stay of the execution of a sentence for a temporary
period
B. 	Reprieve 	2. 	Awarding a lesser sentence in 	place of one
originally awarded.
C. 	Remission 	3. 	Substitution of one form of punishment for a
lighter form.
D. 	Respite 	4. 	Reducing the period of sentence without changing
its character.
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	3 	4 	2 	1
(b) 	4 	2 	1 	3
(c) 	3 	1 	4 	2
(d) 	4 	3 	2 	1
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 123] ---
III.16 | Objective Indian Polity
52. The President of India is not empowered to proclaim:
(a) 	Emergency arising out of war, external aggression or armed rebellion
(b) 	Emergency due to breakdown of constitutional machinery in states
(c) 	Financial emergency in the state of Jammu and Kashmir
(d) 	Emergency arising out of threat to financial stability
53. Consider the following statements:
The President of India has the power to address both the Houses of Parliament at the commence-
ment of:
1. 	The first session after the general elections
2. 	Each session
3. 	The first session of each year
4. 	The budget session of each year
Which of these are correct?
(a) 	2 and 3 	(b) 1 and 4
(c) 	1 and 3 	(d) 2 and 4
54. Consider the following statements:
1. 	When the Vice-President of India acts as the President of India, he performs simultaneously
the functions of the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha.
2. 	The President of India can promulgate Ordinances at any time except when both the Houses
of Parliament are in session.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	1 only 	(b) 2 only
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
55. The Constitutional Amendment relating to the declaration of emergency (1978) requires the Pres-
ident of India to act in accordance with the:
(a) 	Collective advice of the entire Council of Ministers
(b) 	Advice of the Union Cabinet
(c) 	Advice of the Attorney General for India
(d) 	Advice of the Supreme Court
56. The Union Executive of India consists of:
(a) 	The President, the Vice-President, the Lok Sabha Speaker and the Council of Ministers
(b) 	The President, the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, the Lok Sabha Speaker and the
Prime Minister
(c) 	The President and the Council of Ministers
(d) 	The President, the Vice-President and the Council of Ministers
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 124] ---
President | III.17
1. 	(a) 	2. 	(a) 	3. 	(c) 	4. 	(c) 	5. 	(b)
6. 	(b) 	7. 	(c) 	8. 	(b) 	9. 	(b) 	10. 	(b)
11. 	(b) 	12. 	(b) 	13. 	(b) 	14. 	(b) 	15. 	(a)
16. 	(a) 	17. 	(b) 	18. 	(b) 	19. 	(a) 	20. 	(d)
21. 	(c) 	22. 	(c) 	23. 	(a) 	24. 	(a) 	25. 	(c)
26. 	(d) 	27. 	(d) 	28. 	(c) 	29. 	(b) 	30. 	(d)
31. 	(a) 	32. 	(d) 	33. 	(d) 	34. 	(b) 	35. 	(b)
36. 	(a) 	37. 	(d) 	38. 	(d) 	39. 	(a) 	40. 	(b)
41. 	(b) 	42. 	(d) 	43. 	(b) 	44. 	(a) 	45. 	(d)
46. 	(a) 	47. 	(b) 	48. 	(c) 	49. 	(b) 	50. 	(c)
51. 	(c) 	52. 	(c) 	53. 	(c) 	54. 	(b) 	55. 	(b)
56. 	(d)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 125] ---
III.18 | Objective Indian Polity
Vice-President
Eighteen
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Constitution of India provides that the Vice-President of India shall be the ex-officio
Chairman of the Council of States.
2. 	The Constitution of India has not fixed any emoluments for the Vice-President of India in
that capacity.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Vice-President of India may be removed from his office by a resolution of the council of
states passed by a majority of all the then members of the council and agreed to by the House
of the People.
2. 	An election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the term of office of Vice-President
shall be completed before the expiration of the term.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 126] ---
Vice-President | III.19
3. 	The Vice-President shall, not withstanding the expiration of his term, continue to hold office
until his successor enters upon his office.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 1 and 2
(c) 	2 and 3 	(d) 1 and 3
3. 	The Vice-President is elected by an electoral college consisting of:
(a) 	Members of both Houses of Parliament
(b) 	Elected members of both Houses of Parliament
(c) 	Elected members of both Houses of Parliament and the State Legislative Assemblies
(d) 	Members of both Houses of Parliament and the State Legislative Assemblies
4. 	Which of the following statements is/are correct with regard to the Vice-President of India?
1. 	He must be a Member of Parliament.
2. 	He is elected by proportional representation.
3. 	He should not hold any other office of profit.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) 1 and 3
(c) 	2 and 3 	(d) 1 and 2
5. 	Assertion (A): A candidate for Vice-President must be qualified for election as a member of
Rajya Sabha.
Reason (R): 	The Vice-President functions as the Chairman of Rajya Sabha.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not 	the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
6. 	The Vice-President of India may be removed from his office by
(a) 	Impeachment
(b) 	A resolution passed by Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha with a two-thirds majority
(c) 	A resolution passed with a two-thirds majority in a joint session of Parliament
(d) 	A resolution passed by Rajya Sabha with simple majority and agreed to by a majority members
of Lok Sabha
7. 	Which one of the following statements is not correct?
(a) 	The Vice-President of India holds office for a period of five years.
(b) 	The Vice-President of India is eligible for re-election.
(c) 	The Vice-President of India can act as President only for a maximum period of nine months.
(d) 	The Supreme Court of India has to look into all disputes with regard to the election of the
Vice-President of India.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 127] ---
III.20 | Objective Indian Polity
8. 	Assertion (A): During any period when the Vice-President of India acts as President of India or
discharges the functions of the President, he continues to perform the duties of
the office of the chairman of the Council of States.
Reason (R): 	The Vice-President of India is the ex-officio Chairman of the Council of States.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not 	the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
9. 	The Vice-President of India can resign from his office at any time by addressing the resignation
letter to the:
(a) 	Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha 	(b) Chief Justice of India
(c) 	President of India 	(d) Speaker of Lok Sabha
10. Consider the following statements:
1. 	No ground has been mentioned in the constitution for the removal of Vice-President.
2. 	No resolution for the removal of Vice-President can be moved unless at least 21 days’ advance
notice has been given.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
1. 	(c) 	2. 	(a) 	3. 	(a) 	4. 	(c) 	5. 	(a)
6. 	(d) 	7. 	(c) 	8. 	(d) 	9. 	(c) 	10. 	(a)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 128] ---
Prime Minister | III.21
Prime Minister
Nineteen
1. 	Consider the following statements with respect to duties of the Prime Minister according to the
Constitution of India:
1. 	To make rules for the more convenient transaction of business of the Government of India,
and for the allocation among Ministers of the said business.
2. 	If the President so requires, to submit for consideration of the Council of Ministers any
matter on which a decision has been taken by a Minister but which has not been considered
by the Council.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Which one of the following is constitutionally obligatory on the part of the Prime Minister of
India?
(a) 	As the President is the supreme commander of the defence forces, the Prime Minister has to
take all major decisions regarding defence only after prior approval by the President.
(b) 	The Prime Minister has to communicate to the President all decisions of the Cabinet relating
to administration and proposals for legislation.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 129] ---
III.22 | Objective Indian Polity
(c) 	As the ministers are appointed by the President, the Prime Minister has to go by Presidential
discretion in the allocation of business among the ministers.
(d) 	The Prime Minister, if he happens to be the leader of a party not having the required majority,
should prove his majority strength in both the Houses of Parliament within the period
stipulated by the President.
3. 	Which of the following bodies are headed by the Prime Minister?
1. 	National Integration Council
2. 	National Water Resources Council
3. 	National Development Council
4. 	Inter-State Council
5. 	Zonal Councils
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 3, 4 and 5 	(b) 3, 4 and 5
(c) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
4. 	“If any functionary under our constitution is to be compared with the US President, he is the
Prime Minister and not the President of the Union”. This statement is attributed to:
(a) 	Jawaharlal Nehru 	(b) B.R. Ambedkar
(c) 	Rajendra Prasad 	(d) K.M. Munshi
5. 	Which one of the following is correct in terms of the Constitution of India?
(a) 	The Prime Minister decides the allocation of portfolios among the ministers.
(b) 	When the Prime Minister resigns, the Council of Ministers gets dissolved.
(c) 	All the principal policy announcements of the government are made by the Prime Minister.
(d) 	It shall be the duty of Prime Minister to communicate to the President all decisions of the
Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the union.
6. 	Statement I: 	The Prime Minister of India can exercise control over other branches of
government through a coterie of advisors.
Statement II: The Prime Minister and his Cabinet function on the basis of collective responsibility.
Codes:
(a) 	Both the statements are individually true and Statement II is the correct explanation of
Statement I
(b) 	Both the statements are individually true but Statement II is not the correct explanation of
Statement I
(c) 	Statement I is true but Statement II is false
(d) 	Statement I is false but Statement II is true
7. 	The Constitution of India lays down that proposals for legislation are to be communicated to the
President by the
(a) 	Prime Minister
(b) 	Speaker of the Lok Sabha and Chairman of the Rajya Sabha
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 130] ---
Prime Minister | III.23
(c) 	Minister for Law
(d) 	Minister for Parliamentary Affairs
8. 	Who among the following called Prime Minister as “the captain of the ship of the state”?
(a) 	Ramsay Muir 	(b) Lord Morely
(c) 	H.J. Laski 	(d) Munro
9. 	Who of the following became Prime Minister after being Chief Ministers?
1. 	P.V. Narasimha Rao
2. 	Charan Singh
3. 	H.D. Deve Gowda
4. 	V.P. Singh
5. 	Morarji Desai
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	2, 3, 4 and 5 	(b) 1, 2 and 4
(c) 	1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
10. Consider the following statements:
The Prime Minister as the head of the Council of Ministers:
1. 	Has a free hand in the distribution of portfolios
2. 	Can reshuffle the Ministers and ask any Minister to resign
3. 	Is bound by the advice of the Ministers
4. 	Advises the Ministers in day-to-day administration of Ministries
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	1, 2 and 4 	(d) 3 and 4
11. Which of the following are included in Article 78 of the Indian Constitution, defining the duties
of Prime Minister?
1. 	To communicate to the President all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to the
administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation.
2. 	To take prior presidential sanction for the budget before submitting it in the Parliament.
3. 	To furnish the information called for by President regarding administration of affairs of the
Union.
4. 	If the President so requires, to submit for consideration of the Council of Ministers a matter
on which a minister has taken a decision without submitting the same for consideration by the
Council beforehand.
Choose the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 1, 3 and 4
(c) 	2 and 4 	(d) 1 and 3
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 131] ---
III.24 | Objective Indian Polity
1. 	(b) 	2. 	(b) 	3. 	(c) 	4. 	(b) 	5. 	(d)
6. 	(d) 	7. 	(a) 	8. 	(d) 	9. 	(c) 	10. 	(a)
11. 	(b)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 132] ---
Central Council of Ministers | III.25
Central Council of Ministers
Twenty
1. 	Which of the following are not mentioned in the Constitution of India?
1. 	Council of Ministers
2. 	Collective Responsibility
3. 	Resignation of Ministers
4. 	Office of the Deputy Prime Minister
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	3 and 4 	(d) 1 and 3
2. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The President cannot function without the Union Council of Ministers.
2. 	The Solicitor-General is the highest legal authority of the Union Government.
3. 	The Union Council of Ministers can function for sometime even after death or resignation of
the Prime minister.
4. 	In the absence of the Prime Minister, only the Home Minister can preside over emergency
meetings of the Union Council of Ministers.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 133] ---
III.26 | Objective Indian Polity
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) 3 and 4
(c) 	1, 2 and 4 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
3. 	According to Article 74 of the Constitution, which of the following statements relating to the
advice tendered by Ministers to the President would be correct?
(a) 	It shall not be inquired into in any court.
(b) 	It can be inquired into in the Supreme Court.
(c) 	It can be inquired into in all the courts.
(d) 	It cannot be inquired into in the High Courts.
4. 	How are the salaries and allowances of the Union Ministers determined?
(a) 	By the Cabinet Secretariat 	(b) By the Parliament
(c) 	By the Ministry of Finance 	(d) By the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs
5. 	Which of the following Constitutional Amendment Acts has / have made the decisions of the
Council of Ministers binding on the President of India?
(a) 	42nd and 44 th Amendment Acts 	(b) 43rd Amendment Act
(c) 	40th Amendment Act 	(d) 40th and 41st Amendment Acts
6. 	Which of the Articles of the Constitution of India are relevant to analyse the constitutional provi-
sions that deal with the relationship of the President with the Council of Ministers?
(a) 	Articles 71, 75 and 78 	(b) Articles 74, 75 and 78
(c) 	Articles 73, 76 and 78 	(d) Articles 72, 73 and 76
7. 	The accountability or responsibility of the Prime Minister and Cabinet to the Lok Sabha is:
(a) 	Intermittent 	(b) Indirect
(c) 	At the time of elections 	(d) Direct, continuous and collective
8. 	Assertion (A): Collective responsibility of the Cabinet signifies unity and coordination among
members of the Council of Ministers.
Reason (R): 	It is the prerogative of the Prime Minister to select or drop a member of the
Cabinet.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
9. 	In which of the following provisions of the Constitution of India is the principle of collective
responsibility of the Council of Ministers enshrined?
(a) 	Article 75 	(b) Article 74
(c) 	Article 77 	(d) Article 78
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 134] ---
Central Council of Ministers | III.27
10. “There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advice the
President who shall in the exercise of his functions act in accordance with such advice”. This
provision in the Constitution has been laid down by which one of the following Constitutional
Amendment Acts?
(a) 	41st Amendment 	(b) 42nd Amendment
(c) 	43rd Amendment 	(d) 72nd Amendment
11. Article 74 of the Constitution provides that:
(a) 	There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head, to aid and advise
the President in exercise of his functions.
(b) 	There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head, to aid and advise
the President, who shall in exercise of his functions, act in accordance with such advice.
(c) 	There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head, to aid and advise the
President, who shall in exercise of his functions act in accordance with such advice provided
that the President may require the Council of Ministers to reconsider such advice, either
generally or otherwise and the President shall act in accordance with the advice tendered after
such reconsideration.
(d) 	There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head, to aid and advise
the President, who shall in exercise of his functions, act in accordance with such advice or
otherwise on his own.
12. According to the Constitution of India, if the President so requires, it shall be the duty of the
Prime Minister to submit for the consideration of the Council of Ministers any matter on which
a decision has been taken by a Minister, but which has not been considered by the Council. This
ensures:
(a) 	Collective responsibility
(b) 	The status of the Prime Minister as the first among the equals
(c) 	The power of the President to nullify the decision of the Minister
(d) 	The inherent power of the Minister to take a decision independent of the Council of Ministers
13. Consider the following statements:
1. 	All decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the Union must be
communicated to the President.
2. 	The President can call for information relating to proposals for legislation.
3. 	The President can direct that any matter on which decision has been taken by a Minister
should be placed before the Council of Ministers.
4. 	The President has the right to address and send messages to the Council of Ministers to elicit
specific information.
Which of these is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) 3 and 4
(c) 	1, 2 and 3 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 135] ---
III.28 | Objective Indian Polity
14. Which one among the following features of the Constitution of India is indicative of the fact that
the real executive power is vested in the Council of Ministers headed by the Prime Minister?
(a) 	Federalism
(b) 	Representative legislature
(c) 	Universal adult franchise
(d) 	Parliamentary democracy
15. Which one of the following is not correct in relation to the Council of Ministers?
(a) 	It is recognized by the Constitution
(b) 	The number of its members is not specified in the Constitution
(c) 	Its working is as per the provisions in the Constitution
(d) 	Its members and their ranks are decided by the Prime Minister
16. The executive power of the Union is vested in the:
(a) 	Union Cabinet
(b) 	President of India
(c) 	Prime Minister
(d) 	Union Council of Ministers
17. Whenever the Constitution requires the ‘satisfaction’ of the President for the exercise of any
power or function by him, it means:
(a) 	The personal satisfaction of the President
(b) 	The satisfaction of the Council of Ministers
(c) 	The satisfaction of the Members of the Parliament
(d) 	None of the above
1. 	(c) 	2. 	(a) 	3. 	(a) 	4. 	(b) 	5. 	(a)
6. 	(b) 	7. 	(d) 	8. 	(b) 	9. 	(a) 	10. 	(b)
11. 	(c) 	12. 	(a) 	13. 	(c) 	14. 	(d) 	15. 	(c)
16. 	(b) 	17. 	(b)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 136] ---
Cabinet Committees | III.29
Cabinet Committees
Twenty One
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The non-cabinet ministers are debarred from the membership of the Cabinet Committees.
2. 	The Cabinet Committees are an organizational device to reduce the enormous workload of
the cabinet.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct ?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Which of the following provides for the establishment of the Cabinet Committees ?
(a) 	Constitution of India 	(b) Parliamentary Statutes
(c) 	Rules of Business 	(d) Presidential Orders
3. 	Statement I: 	The number, nomenclature and composition of the Cabinet Committees varies
from time to time.
Statement II: The Cabinet Committees are set up by the Prime Minister according to the
exigencies of the time and requirements of the situation.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 137] ---
III.30 | Objective Indian Polity
Codes:
(a) 	Both the statements are individually true and Statement II is the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(b) 	Both the statements are individually true but Statement II is not the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(c) 	Statement I is true but Statement II is false.
(d) 	Statement I is false but Statement II is true.
4. 	Which one of the following Cabinet Committees is described as a “Super-Cabinet” ?
(a) 	Economic Affairs Committee
(b) 	Parliamentary Affairs Committee
(c) 	Political Affairs Committee
(d) 	Appointments Committee
5. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Cabinet cannot review the decisions taken by the Cabinet Committees.
2. 	The Cabinet Committees are based on the principles of division of labour and effective
delegation.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct ?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
6. 	Which of the following cabinet committees is chaired by the Union Home Minister ?
(a) 	Parliamentary Affairs Committee
(b) 	Economic Affairs Committee
(c) 	Political Affairs Committee
(d) 	Appointments Committee
7. 	Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Cabinet Committees) 	(Functions)
A. 	Appointments Committee 	1. 	Looks after the progress of government
business in the Parliament
B. 	Economic Affairs Committee 	2. 	Deals with all policy matters pertaining
to domestic and foreign affairs
C. 	Parliamentary Affairs Committee 	3. 	Decides all higher level appointments
in the Central Secretariat
D. 	Political Affairs Committee 	4. 	Directs and coordinates the
governmental activities in the
economic sphere
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 138] ---
Cabinet Committees | III.31
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	3 	2 	4 	1
(b) 	3 	4 	1 	2
(c) 	4 	3 	2 	1
(d) 	4 	2 	1 	3
1. 	(b) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(a) 	4. 	(c) 	5. 	(b)
6. 	(a) 	7. 	(b)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 139] ---
III.32 | Objective Indian Polity
Parliament
Twenty Two
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	A Bill pending in the Rajya Sabha which has not been passed by the Lok Sabha shall lapse on
dissolution of the Lok Sabha.
2. 	A Bill pending in Parliament shall lapse by reason of the prorogation of the Houses.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Chairman of the Council of States or Speaker of the House of the People, or person
acting as such, shall not vote at any sitting of either House of Parliament or joint sitting of the
House in the first instance, but shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality
of votes.
2. 	A person is qualified to fill a seat in the Council of States or House of the People if he is not
less than twenty-five years of age.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 140] ---
Parliament | III.33
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
3. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	Since the sums required to meet expenditure described by the Constitution of India as
expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India are not submitted to the vote of
Parliament, no House is competent to discuss these estimates.
2. 	Annual Finance Bill provides the legal authority for the withdrawal of sums from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
Which of the statement(s) given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
4. 	Consider the following statements in respect of provisions for removing deadlock between the
two Houses of Parliament:
After a bill has been passed by one House and transmitted to the other House, the President may
notify to the Houses his intention to summon them for a joint sitting, if:
1. 	The Bill is rejected by the other House.
2. 	The Houses have finally disagreed as to the amendments to be made in the Bill.
3. 	More than three months have elapsed from the date of the receipt of the Bill by the other
House without the Bill being passed by it.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 1 and 2 only
(c) 	2 and 3 only 	(d) 1 and 3 only
5. 	Which of the following statements about the reasons for separation of the Railway Budget from
the General Budget are correct?
1. 	To introduce flexibility in railway finance management
2. 	To facilitate a business approach to the railway policy
3. 	To secure stability of the general revenues by providing an assured annual contribution from
railway revenues
4. 	To enable the railways to keep their profits for their own development
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	2, 3 and 4 only 	(b) 1 and 4 only
(c) 	1, 2 and 3 only 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
6. 	An exceptional grant under the Constitution of India is regarded as
(a) 	An advance on account of estimated expenditure for a part of any financial year pending
completion of procedure for voting of grant
(b) 	A grant for meeting an unexpected demand on account of indefinite character of the service
which cannot be stated with details
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 141] ---
III.34 | Objective Indian Polity
(c) 	A grant forming no part of current service of any financial year
(d) 	A grant made when a need has arisen during the current financial year for additional
expenditure upon some new service
7. 	The provision for the Contingency Fund of India results in:
(a) 	Absolving the executive from preparing the estimates of the expenditure
(b) 	Compelling the legislature to approve the expenditure
(c) 	Reducing the legislative control over the executive
(d) 	Providing a safety-valve to tide over a crisis
8. 	Which of the following tools of control may be adopted for raising a discussion in the House on
a matter of urgent public importance?
(a) 	Censure motion 	(b) Adjournment motion
(c) 	Calling attention 	(d) Cut motion
9. 	Consider the following statements relating to the procedure of the election of the Speaker and the
Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha:
1. 	The election of a Speaker shall be held on such date as the Prime Minister may fix and the
Secretary General shall send to every member notice of this date.
2. 	The election of a Deputy Speaker shall be held on such date as the Speaker may fix and the
Secretary General shall send to every member notice of this date.
Which of the statement(s) given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
10. Which one of the following statements is not correct?
(a) 	An Appropriation Act is not essential for passing a grant under a Vote of Credit.
(b) 	Re-appropriation does not involve any additional expenditure.
(c) 	The Rajya Sabha has no power to vote on the demands for grants.
(d) 	No amendment can be proposed in the Appropriation Bill in either House of Parliament.
11. According to the Constitution, the Lok Sabha must meet at least:
(a) 	Thrice each year with no more than two months between sessions
(b) 	Twice each year with no more than three months between sessions
(c) 	Twice each year with no more than four months between sessions
(d) 	Twice each year with no more than six months between sessions
12. Consider the following statements:
1. 	The nature of a Bill, if it is certified by the Speaker of the House of People as a Money Bill,
is not open to question in a Court of Law.
2. 	The President of India has the power to question the nature of a Bill to be taken as a Money
Bill even if it is certified to be so by the Speaker of the House of People.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 142] ---
Parliament | III.35
Which of the statement(s) given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
13. Assertion (A): The estimates that relate to the expenditure charged upon the Consolidate Fund
of India shall not be submitted to the vote of Parliament.
Reason (R): 	Parliament is not empowered to discuss expenditure charged upon the Consolidated
Fund of India.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
14. What does the ‘Rule of Lapse’ mean?
(a) 	All pending bills in Parliament lapse with its prorogation.
(b) 	All appropriations voted by the Parliament expire at the end of the financial year.
(c) 	The demand for grants of a ministry lapses with criticism of its policy by the opposition.
(d) 	The appropriation bill lapses if it is not returned by the Rajya Sabha within 14 days.
15. Consider the following statements:
The expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India comprises:
1. 	Pension payable to Judges of High Court
2. 	Debt charges for which the Government of India is liable
3. 	Salary, allowances and pension payable to Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 1 and 3 only
(c) 	2 and 3 only 	(d) 1 and 2 only
16. The object of the adjournment motion in Parliament is to:
(a) 	Collect information from the ministers 	(b) Make a cut in the budget proposals
(c) 	Criticise a particular policy of the Government(d) Topple the Government
17. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer by using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Parliamentary Procedure) 	(Implications)
A. 	Division 	1. 	Brings the debate to a close
B. 	Guillotine 	2. 	Formal proposal made by a member to the House
C. 	Motion 	3. 	Relates to interpretation or enforcement of the rules
of procedure or Constitution
D. 	Point of order 	4. 	Concludes discussion on demand for grants
5. 	Mode of arriving at a decision
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 143] ---
III.36 | Objective Indian Polity
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	4 	5 	1 	2
(b) 	5 	4 	1 	3
(c) 	5 	4 	2 	3
(d) 	4 	5 	2 	1
18. Which one of the following is the correct sequence of the given stages in relation to the enact-
ment of the budget?
(a) 	Voting of 	demands for grants-General discussion-Consideration and passing of 	the
Appropriation Bill-Consideration and passing of the Finance Bill
(b) 	General discussion-Voting of 	demands for grants-Consideration and passing of 	the
Appropriation Bill-Consideration and passing of the Finance Bill
(c) 	Voting of 	demands for grants-Consideration and passing of 	the Appropriation Bill-
Consideration and passing of the Finance Bill-General discussion
(d) 	General discussion-Consideration and passing of the Finance Bill-Consideration and passing
of the Appropriation Bill-Voting of demands for grants
19. Which one of the following pairs is not correctly matched?
State 	No. of members in the
Rajya Sabha
(a) 	Maharashtra 	— 	19
(b) 	Tamil Nadu 	— 	18
(c) 	Bihar 	— 	18
(d) 	West Bengal 	— 	16
20. Which one of the following events is not considered to be an indication of loss of confidence of
the lower House of the Parliament?
(a) 	Adjournment motion is carried
(b) 	Vote of thanks on the President’s address is not carried
(c) 	Cut on Money Bill is passed
(d) 	Censure motion is passed
21. How much is the quorum of a House of Parliament of India?
(a) 	One-half of the membership of the House (b) One-third of the membership of the House
(c) 	Two-third of the membership of the House (d) One-tenth of the membership of the House
22. Assertion (A): After a Money Bill is passed by the Lok Sabha and transmitted to the Rajya
Sabha, the recommendations of the Rajya Sabha have to be accepted by the Lok
Sabha within 14 days from receipt of the recommendations and then get them
incorporated in the Bill.
Reason (R): 	A Money Bill cannot be introduced in the Rajya Sabha.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 144] ---
Parliament | III.37
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A.
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A.
(c) 	A is true but R is false.
(d) 	A is false but R is true.
23. Consider the following statements:
A Bill is deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with the:
1. 	Alteration or regulation of any tax
2. 	Regulation of the borrowing of money by the government
3. 	Appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India
4. 	Custody of the Contingency Fund of India
Which of the above statements are correct?
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 only 	(b) 2, 3 and 4 only
(c) 	1 and 4 only 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
24. The Rajya Sabha has exclusive jurisdiction in:
(a) 	Approving a proclamation of emergency
(b) 	The creation and abolition of States
(c) 	The election of the Vice-President
(d) 	Authorising Parliament to legislate on a subject in the State List
25. What is the maximum period that shall not intervene between last sitting in one session and the
date appointed for first sitting in the next session for each House of Parliament?
(a) 	Four months 	(b) Five months
(c) 	Six months 	(d) Eight months
26. When Demands for Grants are introduced in Lok Sabha, the Speaker applies the guillotine:
(a) 	After the demands are discussed and approved
(b) 	After the demands are discussed and voted down by Lok Sabha
(c) 	When the demands are discussed and reduced
(d) 	When the time allotted is coming to a close
27. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer by using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Parliamentary Device) 	(Substance)
A. 	Cut Motion 	1. 	To draw attention of the Ministers on the matters of
urgent public importance
B. 	Call Attention Motion 	2. 	To draw attention of the Speaker towards incorrect or
incomplete answer by Ministers
C. 	Privilege Motion 	3. 	To move a proposal to reduce expenditure on the
budget proposals
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 145] ---
III.38 | Objective Indian Polity
D. 	Adjournment Motion 	4. 	To interrupt the normal business of the House
5. 	To conclude a discussion on demand for grants
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	3 	1 	2 	4
(b) 	2 	4 	5 	1
(c) 	3 	4 	2 	1
(d) 	2 	1 	5 	4
28. Which one of the following powers of the Rajya Sabha is provided in the Constitution of India?
(a) 	To reject or amend a money bill
(b) 	To decide whether a bill is a money bill
(c) 	To vote for public expenditure
(d) 	To delay a money bill for a period not exceeding fourteen days.
29. The method of election of the members of the Rajya Sabha on the basis of proportional represen-
tation by the State Legislatures was borrowed from the
(a) 	Constitution of U.S.A.
(b) 	Constitution of Australia
(c) 	Constitution of South Africa
(d) 	Constitution of Ireland
30. Which one of the following statements is correct?
Parliament can make a law with respect to a matter in the state list in the national interest if:
(a) 	The President of India gives permission
(b) 	The Parliament passes a resolution
(c) 	A State makes a request
(d) 	The Rajya Sabha passes a resolution by a two-thirds majority
31. Which one of the following statements is not correct?
(a) 	There is a provision in the Constitution of India for readjustment of allocation of seats in the
Lok Sabha upon the completion of each census.
(b) 	If for a period of 60 days, a member of either House is absent without permission of the
House from all meetings thereof, the House may declare his seat vacant.
(c) 	The Rajya Sabha approves Money Bill after it has been passed by the Lok Sabha.
(d) 	The Attorney-General of India has the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the
proceedings of either House of Parliament.
32. Assertion (A): Money bills originate only in the Lower House of Parliament.
Reason (R): 	The Lower House of the Parliament is a popularly elected body.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 146] ---
Parliament | III.39
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not 	the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
33. Which one of the following schedules of the Constitution of India deals with allocation of seats
in the Council of States?
(a) 	Third Schedule 	(b) Fourth Schedule
(c) 	Fifth Schedule 	(d) Sixth Schedule
34. Under Article 312 of the Constitution of India, the Rajya Sabha has exclusive power to recom-
mend the Constitution of which one of the following?
(a) 	River-valley Development Authorities 	(b) Zonal Councils
(c) 	Administrative Tribunals 	(d) New All-India Services
35. Payments from the Consolidated Fund of India are authorised by the
(a) 	Money Bill 	(b) Appropriation Act
(c) 	Finance Act 	(d) Consolidated Fund Act
36. Vote of Credit provides for making
(a) 	An exceptional grant which forms no part of current service of any financial year
(b) 	Any grant in advance in respect of estimated expenditure for a part of any financial year
(c) 	A grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon resources of India
(d) 	A grant for additional expenditure upon new service not contemplated in the financial year
37. Which one of the following is not a measure of control exercised by the Parliament over govern-
ment?
(a) 	Asking questions 	(b) Committees system
(c) 	Review of decision 	(d) No-confidence motion
38. Consider the following statements:
1. 	A Bill returned by the President for reconsideration does not lapse on the dissolution of the
Lok Sabha.
2. 	A Bill passed by the Lok Sabha and pending in the Rajya Sabha lapses on the dissolution of
the Lok Sabha.
3. 	A Bill under consideration of the Lok Sabha lapses when the Lok Sabha is prorogued.
4. 	A Bill pending in the Rajya Sabha but not passed by the Lok Sabha does not lapse on the
dissolution of the Lok Sabha.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 	2, 3 and 4 only 	(b) 1 and 2 only
(c) 	3 and 4 only 	(d) 1, 2 and 4 only
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 147] ---
III.40 | Objective Indian Polity
39. During the discussion on the Demands for Grants, cut motions can be moved to reduce the
amount of a demand. Which of the following categories are classified as cut-motion?
1. 	Policy cut
2. 	Economy cut
3. 	Token cut
4. 	Programme cut
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 2 and 4
(c) 	1, 2 and 3 	(d) 3 and 4
40. Which one of the following statements holds good in respect of the Rajya Sabha?
(a) 	One-third of its members retire after every three years.
(b) 	Two-thirds of its members retire after every three years.
(c) 	Two-thirds of its members retire after every two years.
(d) 	One-third of its members retire after every two years.
41. Which one of the following is the correct sequence through which an Ordinary Bill passes through
in the Parliament?
(a) 	Authentication, Discussion of Principles, Clause-by-Clause consideration, Post-introduction
motion, Assent
(b) 	Post-introduction 	motion, 	Discussion 	of 	Principles, 	Clause-by-Clause 	consideration,
Authentication, Assent
(c) 	Discussion of 	Principles, Authentication, Post-introduction motion, Clause-by-Clause
consideration, Assent
(d) 	Discussion 	of 	Principles, 	Post-introduction 	motion, 	Clause-by-Clause 	consideration,
Authentication, Assent
42. Who among the following decides whether a Bill is a Money Bill?
(a) 	The Finance Minister
(b) 	The Chairman of the Rajya Sabha
(c) 	The President of India
(d) 	The Speaker of the Lok Sabha
43. A non-money bill passed by the Parliament is returned by the President to Parliament for recon-
sideration. It is passed once again by the Parliament without any change. Now, the:
(a) 	President can again withhold his assent
(b) 	Bill will automatically lapse
(c) 	Bill will be referred to the Supreme Court
(d) 	President will give his assent
44. The Lok Sabha Secretariat comes under direct supervision of the:
(a) 	Ministry of Home Affairs 	(b) Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs
(c) 	Prime Minister’s Office 	(d) Speaker of the Lok Sabha
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 148] ---
Parliament | III.41
45. Consider the following statements regarding money bills:
1. 	They originate in Lok Sabha
2. 	They originate in Rajya Sabha
3. 	Rajya Sabha can recommend amendments.
4. 	Both the Houses have equal powers over them.
Which of these statements is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) 1 and 3
(c) 	Only 2 	(d) Only 4
46. If a member of either House of Parliament is without the permission of the House absent from
all meetings thereof for more than a certain period, the House may declare his seat vacant. What
is the duration of this period?
(a) 	60 days 	(b) 45 days
(c) 	30 days 	(d) 15 days
47. Vote on account means:
(a) 	The expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India is not submitted to the vote of
Parliament.
(b) 	A proposal submitted by Finance Minister before presenting the budget.
(c) 	To bring a proposal related to the speech of the President before the joint session of the
Parliament.
(d) 	If the budget is not passed before 1st April, the Parliament is authorised to sanction any grant
in advance to meet the expenses.
48. The Railway Budget was separated from the Central Budget in the year
(a) 	1920 	(b) 1921
(c) 	1922 	(d) 1923
49. Which one of the following statements related to Money Bills is not correct?
(a) 	It cannot be introduced in the Council of States.
(b) 	If any question arises whether the bill is Money Bill or not, the decision of the Lok Sabha
Speaker is final.
(c) 	In case of a deadlock over a Money Bill, the President can summon a joint sitting of
Parliament.
(d) 	A Money Bill cannot be introduced except on the recommendation of the President.
50. Which one of the following statements is correct?
The estimates which relate to expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India:
(a) 	Can be discussed in the House of People only
(b) 	Can be discussed in the Council of States only
(c) 	Can be discussed in either House of Parliament
(d) 	Cannot be discussed in any House of Parliament
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 149] ---
III.42 | Objective Indian Polity
51. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer by using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Subject) 	(Articles of the Constitution of India)
A. 	Annual Financial Statement or Budget 	1. 	Article 110
B. 	Supplementary, additional or excess grants 	2. 	Article 112
C. 	Appropriation Bill 	3. 	Article 114
D. 	Definition of ‘Money Bill’ 	4. 	Article 115
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	2 	3 	4 	1
(b) 	1 	4 	3 	2
(c) 	2 	4 	3 	1
(d) 	1 	3 	4 	2
52. Which one of the following is not applicable regarding the purpose of Cut Motion?
(a) 	Raising questions of urgent public importance
(b) 	Drawing attention to any lapse on the part of the administration
(c) 	Drawing attention to specific problems
(d) 	Concentrating discussion on some concrete points
53. The quorum requirement in the Rajya Sabha is:
(a) 	25 	(b) 50
(c) 	100 	(d) 126
54. What will follow if a Money Bill is substantially amended by the Rajya Sabha?
(a) 	The Lok Sabha may still proceed with the Bill, accepting or not accepting the recommendations
of the Rajya Sabha.
(b) 	The Lok Sabha cannot consider the Bill further.
(c) 	The Lok Sabha may send the Bill to the Rajya Sabha for reconsideration.
(d) 	The President may call a joint sitting for passing the Bill.
55. Which one of the following statements about the Speaker of the Lok Sabha is not correct?
(a) 	He has the power to adjourn the House sine die.
(b) 	He has the power to summon the House even after prorogation.
(c) 	He continues to be in office even after the dissolution of the House and until immediately
before the first meeting of the House.
(d) 	He must vacate the office if he ceases to be a member of the Lok Sabha.
56. The Chairman of the Rajya Sabha is elected by:
(a) 	Elected members of Rajya Sabha 	(b) All members of Rajya Sabha
(c) 	Elected members of Parliament 	(d) All members of Parliament
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 150] ---
Parliament | III.43
57. Assertion (A): The rule of lapse is not essential for effective financial control.
Reason (R): 	The rule of lapse suffers from weaknesses relating to planning and control of
expenditure.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
58. The Joint Session of the two Houses of the Parliament is chaired by the:
(a) 	Vice-President of India 	(b) Speaker of the House of the People
(c) 	Chairman of the Rajya Sabha 	(d) Prime Minister of India
59. Under Article 368 of the Constitution of India, a Constitutional Amendment Bill is passed by the
Parliament by:
(a) 	Simple majority of members present and voting
(b) 	Two-thirds majority of members present and voting
(c) 	Three-fourths majority of members present and voting
(d) 	Majority of total membership and majority of not less than two-thirds of the members
present and voting
60. Which one of the following statements is not correct?
(a) 	The Railway budget and the demand for grants relating to Railways are presented to the
Parliament separately.
(b) 	Generally one demand for grant is presented in respect of each Ministry or Department.
(c) 	The demand for grants for the Department of Telecommunications is presented to the
Parliament separately.
(d) 	The demands for grants of various Ministries include both plan and non-plan estimates of
expenditure under each head.
61. Which of the following is not correct with regard to the Speaker of the Lok Sabha?
(a) 	The Speaker certifies whether a particular bill is money bill or not.
(b) 	Discussion on a motion for the removal of the Speaker is presided over by the Vice-President.
(c) 	The Speaker has power to curtail or cancel the zero hour.
(d) 	The Speaker nominates chairpersons of various committees.
62. Which of the following statements are correct in respect of parliamentary debate on Appropria-
tion Bill?
1. 	No amendments can be moved on the amount of expenditure.
2. 	Speaker is empowered to withhold permission on matters of repetitive nature.
3. 	Rajya Sabha has power to amend or reject the Bill.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 151] ---
III.44 | Objective Indian Polity
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 only 	(b) 1 and 3 only
(c) 	2 and 3 only 	(d) 1, 2 and 3
63. According to Parliamentary procedure, the term ‘guillotine’ means that the Speaker:
(a) 	Stops the business on hand and puts the
(b) 	Adjourns the House before expiry of the time matter to vote
(c) 	Disallows voting on a motion
(d) 	Reprimands a member for misbehaviour
64. While discussing a budget, the Parliament cannot:
(a) 	Give assent to the demand
(b) 	Reduce the demand
(c) 	Refuse the demand
(d) 	Increase the demand
65. Which one of the following is not related to Adjournment Motion?
(a) 	The matter is framed in general terms.
(b) 	The matter is urgent.
(b) 	The matter is of general public interest.
(c) 	The matter does not raise a question of privilege.
66. Which one among the following carries out demarcation of electoral constituencies in each State
and allocation of seats in the Lok Sabha to different States?
(a) 	Election Commission 	(b) Register General
(c) 	Delimitation Commission 	(d) States Reorganisation Commission
67. Which of the following is/are correct in respect of ‘Zero Hour’ discussion?
1. 	It is not directed against individual Minister.
2. 	It covers questions raised over matters of public importance.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
68. Which one of the following is true of the Appropriation Act?
(a) 	It is the demand for grants approved by the Parliament.
(b) 	It applies to approval of the budget by the Parliament.
(c) 	Authorisation by the Parliament for withdrawal of money from the consolidated fund
(d) 	Authorisation by the Parliament for withdrawal of money from the contingency fund
69. Which one of the following statements is correct with regard to the power of Parliament in enact-
ing the Budget?
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 152] ---
Parliament | III.45
(a) 	It can increase a tax, but not reduce it.
(b) 	It can increase a tax, as well as reduce or abolish it.
(c) 	It cannot increase a tax, but can reduce or abolish it.
(d) 	It can neither increase a tax nor reduce it.
70. Who among the following can establish additional courts for better administration of any existing
law with respect to a matter contained in the Union List?
(a) 	Chief Justice of India 	(b) High Court of the concerned State
(c) 	Parliament 	(d) Concerned State Legislature
71. Which of the following statements is/are correct?
1. 	No Member of the Parliament shall be liable to any proceedings in any Court in respect of
any vote given by him in any Committee of the Parliament.
2. 	A House of the Parliament can try anyone or any case directly, as a Court of Justice.
3. 	No Member of the Parliament shall be liable to any proceedings in any Court in respect of
anything said in the Parliament.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	1 and 3 	(d) Only 1
72. Rajya Sabha has equal powers with Lok Sabha:
(a) 	In the matter of creating new All-India Services
(b) 	In amending the Constitution
(c) 	In the removal of the Government
(d) 	In making cut motions
73. Who among the following chooses a member of the Council of States to be its Deputy Chair-
man?
(a) 	The President
(b) 	The Union Minister of Parliamentary Affairs
(c) 	The Prime Minister
(d) 	The Council of States
74. The Demands for Supplementary Grants must be presented to and passed by the House:
(a) 	Before the end of the respective financial year
(b) 	Before the budget of the following year is passed
(c) 	After the withdrawal of money from the Consolidated Fund
(d) 	After the submission of report of C.A.G.
75. Which of the following expenditures shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India?
1. 	The emoluments and allowances of the President and other expenditure relating to his office
2. 	The emoluments and allowances of the Prime Minister and other expenditure relating to his
office
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 153] ---
III.46 | Objective Indian Polity
3. 	The salaries and allowances of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of
States
4. 	The salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha
Choose the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 2, 3 and 4
(c) 	1, 3 and 4 	(d) 1, 2 and 4
76. Demands for grants can emanate only from:
(a) 	The leader of the Opposition
(b) 	The Executive
(c) 	The chairman of the Estimates Committee
(d) 	Any member who is not a member of the ruling party
77. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer by using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Grants) 	(Meanings)
A. 	Vote on account 	1. 	Lumpsum money granted without detailed estimates
B. 	Vote on credit 	2. 	Additional expenditure not covered in the approved
budget
C. 	Supplementary demand for grants 	3. 	Amount spent in excess of the grants
D. 	Excess demand for grants 	4. 	Grants in advance pending budgetary approval
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	1 	4 	3 	2
(b) 	1 	4 	2 	3
(c) 	4 	1 	2 	3
(d) 	4 	1 	3 	2
78. What is meant by ‘Zero Hour’?
(a) 	Exact time when the question hour ends
(b) 	Time between question hour and next item on the agenda
(c) 	Time allotted for informal discussion between two stages of discussion on a bill
(d) 	Specific time allotted for a discussion on budget
79. Which of the following regarding the Rajya Sabha are correct?
1. 	It is not subject to dissolution.
2. 	It has a term of six years.
3. 	One-third of its members retire after every two years.
4. 	Its members shall not be less than 25 years of age .
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 154] ---
Parliament | III.47
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 2, 3 and 4
(c) 	1 and 3 	(d) 2 and 4
80. Which one of the following has precedence over every other motion?
(a) 	Calling attention 	(b) Half-an-hour discussion
(c) 	Adjournment motion 	(d) A resolution by both the Houses jointly
81. A Money Bill deals with:
1. 	The receipt of money on account of the public account of India
2. 	Giving any guarantee by the Government of India for borrowing of money
3. 	Custody of Consolidated Fund of India
4. 	Withdrawal of money from Contingency Fund of India
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 1, 2, 3 and 4
(c) 	1, 2 and 4 	(d) 3 and 4
82. When an advance grant is made by Parliament, pending the regular passage of the budget it is
called:
(a) 	Vote on credit 	(b) Token grant
(c) 	Vote on account 	(d) Supplementary grant
83. Consider the following statements:
1. 	The allocation of seats in the Rajya Sabha to be filled by the representatives of the States and
of the Union Territories is in accordance with the provisions in that behalf contained in the
Fourth Schedule of the Constitution of India.
2. 	The representatives of each State and Union Territory in the Rajya Sabha are elected by elected
members of the Legislative Assembly of the State and the body functioning as Legislature for
the Union Territory in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means
of the single transferable vote.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
84. Consider the following statements:
1. 	The nature of a Bill which is certified by the Speaker as a Money Bill shall not be open to
question in the either House of Parliament but can be taken up only in a court of law.
2. 	After the grants included in the Annual Financial Statement are voted by the House of the
People, the grants so made by the House of the People, as well as the expenditure charged on
the Consolidated Fund of India and the taxing proposals of the budget are incorporated in
the Appropriation Bill.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 155] ---
III.48 | Objective Indian Polity
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
85. Statement I: 	Usually a vote on account is discussed in detail and voted upon by the Parliament.
Statement II: A vote on account empowers the Lok Sabha to make a grant in advance for a part
of the financial year pending completion of the budgetary process.
Codes:
(a) 	Both the statements are individually true and Statement II is the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(b) 	Both the statements are individually true but Statement II is not the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(c) 	Statement I is true but Statement II is false.
(d) 	Statement I is false but Statement II is true.
86. When an Ordinary Bill is referred to a joint sitting of both the Houses of Parliament, it has to be
passed by a:
(a) 	Simple majority of the total number of members of both the Houses present and voting
(b) 	Two-thirds majority of the total number of members of both the Houses
(c) 	Simple majority of the total number of members of both the Houses
(d) 	Two-thirds majority of the total number of members of both the Houses present and voting
87. Consider the following statements with respect to the Rajya Sabha:
1. 	The origin of the Rajya Sabha can be traced back to 1919, when in pursuance to the Government
of India Act, 1919, a second chamber known as the Council of States was created.
2. 	The Rajya Sabha has special powers to declare that it is necessary and expedient in the national
interest that Parliament may make laws with respect to a matter in the State List.
Which of the statement(s) given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
88. Charged expenditure upon the Consolidated Fund of India:
(a) 	Is submitted to the vote of the Parliament
(b) 	Is not submitted to the vote of Rajya Sabha
(c) 	Is not submitted for the sanction of the President
(d) 	Is not submitted to the vote of the Parliament
89. ‘No tax shall be levied or collected except by authority of law.’ Which Article of the Constitution
of India provides this?
(a) 	Article 209 	(b) Article 215
(c) 	Article 256 	(d) Article 265
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 156] ---
Parliament | III.49
90. The estimates of expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India included in the budget and
required to be voted by the Lok Sabha are submitted in the form of:
(a) 	Charged Expenditure 	(b) Capital Budget
(c) 	Demands for Grants 	(d) Revenue Budget
91. The question asked orally after the Question Hour in the House is called:
(a) 	Supplementary question 	(b) Short-notice question
(c) 	Starred question 	(d) Unstarred question
92. The economy cut-motion seeks to reduce the proposed expenditure of a demand for grant by:
(a) 	Rupees one hundred 	(b) Rupee one
(c) 	A specified amount 	(d) An unspecified amount
93. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Terms) 	(Implications)
A. 	Voting on the demands for grants 	1. 	Prior consent of the President
B. 	Budget 	2. 	Not subject to vote of Parliament
C. 	Money Bill 	3. 	An instrument of socio-economic change
D. 	Charged Expenditure 	4. 	Enactment of Budget
5. 	Public Accounts Committee
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	4 	3 	1 	2
(b) 	3 	4 	2 	5
(c) 	1 	3 	4 	2
(d) 	1 	4 	3 	2
94. Pending the passage of Finance Bill in the Parliament, the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act,
1931 empowers the government to collect taxes for a period of:
(a) 	50 days 	(b) 60 days
(c) 	75 days 	(d) 90 days
95. The Consolidated Fund of India is made up of:
(a) 	The excise duty and the income tax
(b) 	The income tax and the corporate tax
(c) 	The money raised from all loans
(d) 	All revenue receipts of the Government of India
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 157] ---
III.50 | Objective Indian Polity
96. A grant provided by the Parliament in respect of the estimated expenditure for the part of the
ensuing financial year pending the regular passage of the budget is called:
(a) 	Appropriation account 	(b) Token cut
(c) 	Vote on account 	(d) Cut motion
97. In the context of the budget, the term ‘guillotine’ is used with reference to:
(a) 	Appropriation Bill 	(b) Consolidated Fund charges
(c) 	Voting of Demands 	(d) Finance Bill
98. The charged expenditure includes:
(a) 	Any sums required to satisfy any judgement, decree or award of any court or arbitral tribunals
(b) 	Debt charges for which the Government of India is liable
(c) 	The salaries and allowances of certain high officials
(d) 	All the above
99. Statement I: The Parliament exerts authority over administration through the appropriation
process.
Statement II: The gross amount of the appropriation determines the volume of official activity
and an itemized appropriation act may leave little or no administrative discretion.
Codes:
(a) 	Both the statements are individually true and Statement II is the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(b) 	Both the statements are individually true but Statement II is not the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(c) 	Statement I is true but Statement II is false.
(d) 	Statement I is false but Statement II is true.
100. Consider the following statements:
1. 	After the demands for grants in the Annual Financial Statement are voted by the Lok Sabha,
the grants so made as well as the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India are
incorporated in the Annual Finance Bill.
2. 	The taxing proposals of the budget are included in an Appropriation Bill.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 158] ---
Parliament | III.51
1. 	(d) 	2. 	(a) 	3. 	(d) 	4. 	(b) 	5. 	(d)
6. 	(c) 	7. 	(d) 	8. 	(b) 	9. 	(b) 	10. 	(a)
11. 	(d) 	12. 	(a) 	13. 	(c) 	14. 	(b) 	15. 	(a)
16. 	(c) 	17. 	(c) 	18. 	(b) 	19. 	(c) 	20. 	(a)
21. 	(d) 	22. 	(d) 	23. 	(d) 	24. 	(d) 	25. 	(c)
26. 	(d) 	27. 	(a) 	28. 	(d) 	29. 	(c) 	30. 	(d)
31. 	(c) 	32. 	(a) 	33. 	(b) 	34. 	(d) 	35. 	(b)
36. 	(c) 	37. 	(c) 	38. 	(d) 	39. 	(c) 	40. 	(d)
41. 	(b) 	42. 	(d) 	43. 	(d) 	44. 	(d) 	45. 	(b)
46. 	(a) 	47. 	(d) 	48. 	(b) 	49. 	(c) 	50. 	(c)
51. 	(c) 	52. 	(a) 	53. 	(a) 	54. 	(a) 	55. 	(b)
56. 	(d) 	57. 	(d) 	58. 	(b) 	59. 	(d) 	60. 	(c)
61. 	(b) 	62. 	(a) 	63. 	(a) 	64. 	(d) 	65. 	(a)
66. 	(c) 	67. 	(b) 	68. 	(c) 	69. 	(c) 	70. 	(c)
71. 	(c) 	72. 	(b) 	73. 	(d) 	74. 	(a) 	75. 	(c)
76. 	(b) 	77. 	(c) 	78. 	(b) 	79. 	(c) 	80. 	(c)
81. 	(b) 	82. 	(c) 	83. 	(a) 	84. 	(d) 	85. 	(d)
86. 	(a) 	87. 	(c) 	88. 	(d) 	89. 	(d) 	90. 	(c)
91. 	(a) 	92. 	(c) 	93. 	(a) 	94. 	(c) 	95. 	(d)
96. 	(c) 	97. 	(c) 	98. 	(d) 	99. 	(a) 	100. 	(d)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 159] ---
III.52 | Objective Indian Polity
Parliamentary Committees
Twenty Three
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	After the Annual Financial Statement is presented before the House of the People, it is
examined by the Public Accounts Committee.
2. 	The Public Accounts Committee examines the report of the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India after it is laid before the Parliament.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Parliamentary Committee on Empowerment of Women was constituted in 1997.
2. 	The Parliamentary Committee on Empowerment of Women consists of 20 members of the
Lok Sabha and 10 members of the Rajya Sabha.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 160] ---
Parliamentary Committees | III.53
3. 	Which among the following are the merits of the Parliamentary Departmental Standing Commit-
tees constituted to scrutinize the budget proposals?
1. 	Legislative control is now more legal because the committees are established by law
2. 	Experts and specialists have been nominated to help the members of the Parliament
3. 	Legislative control is now much more close, continuous and in-depth
4. 	The Rajya Sabha and the opposition parties can play a greater role in exercising financial
control
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	3 and 4 	(d) 1 and 4
4. 	Which one of the following committees is not a Standing Committee of the Parliament?
(a) 	Public Accounts Committee
(b) 	Estimates Committee
(c) 	Committee on Public Undertakings
(d) 	Consultative Committee of the Ministry of Finance
5. 	Match List I with List II and select the correct answer by using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Parliamentary Committees) 	(Functions)
A. 	Select Committee 	1. 	Allocates time for discussion on various items
B. 	Committee on Petitions 	2. 	Considers the question o contempt of the House
C. 	Business Advisory Committee 	3. 	Entertains representations from individuals
D. 	Estimates Committee 	4. 	Scrutinises a bill clause by clause and suggests
changes
5. 	Examines departmental expenditure in the budget
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	4 	3 	1 	5
(b) 	3 	4 	1 	5
(c) 	4 	3 	5 	2
(d) 	3 	4 	5 	2
6. 	The Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee of the Parliament is appointed by the:
(a) 	Speaker of Lok Sabha
(b) 	Prime Minister of India
(c) 	President of India
(d) 	Chairman of Rajya Sabha
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 161] ---
III.54 | Objective Indian Polity
7. 	Which one of the following Parliamentary Committees consists exclusively of members of the
Lok Sabha?
(a) 	The Public Accounts Committee
(b) 	The Estimates Committee
(c) 	The Committee on Public Undertakings
(d) 	The Committee on the Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
8. 	Which of the following committees are helped by the CAG in their work of exercising Parliamen-
tary control over the executive?
1. 	Public Accounts Committee 	2. Committee of Privileges
3. 	Estimates Committee 	4. Committee on Public Undertakings
Select the correct answer by using the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 4 	(b) 1, 2 and 4
(c) 	1, 2 and 3 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
9. 	Which one of the following is the correct chronological order of the evolution of the given Com-
mittees?
(a) 	Committee on Public Undertakings — Estimates Committee — Public Accounts Committee
(b) 	Estimates Committee — Public Accounts Committee — Committee on Public Undertakings
(c) 	Committee on Public Undertakings — Public Accounts Committee — Estimates Committee
(d) 	Public Accounts Committee — Estimates Committee — Committee on Public Undertakings
10. Which one of the following is a Parliamentary Standing Committee?
(a) 	Committee on Draft Five-Year Plan 	(b) Railway Convention Committee
(c) 	Business Advisory Committee 	(d) Joint Committee on Fertilizer Pricing
11. Consider the following statements regarding Public Accounts Committee:
1. 	It examines the Audit Report of the CAG
2. 	The suggestions made by the Committee are necessarily accepted by the Government
3. 	It ensures the observance of the canons of financial propriety in all transactions
4. 	The Committee functions in a non-partisan manner
Which of these statements are correct?
(a) 	1, 3 and 4 	(b) 2, 3 and 4
(c) 	1 and 2 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
12. Which one of the following committees recommended for the creation of Committee on Public
Undertakings?
(a) 	Krishna Menon Committee 	(b) Ashok Chanda Committee
(c) 	Gorwala Committee 	(d) T. Krishnamachari Committee
13. Which one of the following pairs is not correctly matched?
(a) 	Committee on Petitions: Standing Committee to inquire
(b) 	Committee on Government Assurances: Standing Committee to scrutinize
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 162] ---
Parliamentary Committees | III.55
(c) 	Committee on Subordinate Legislation: Standing Committee to inquire
(d) 	Select or Joint Committee on Bills: Ad hoc Committee
14. Which one of the following statements is not correct with regard to Parliamentary Committees?
(a) 	The Public Accounts Committee and the Public Undertakings Committee are joint committees
of both the Houses of Parliament.
(b) 	Seventeen Departmentally Related Committees were set-up in early 1990s.
(c) 	There are Standing and Ad hoc Committees.
(d) 	The Estimates Committee and the Public Accounts Committee are always headed by a senior
leader of the ruling party/coalition.
15. Which one of the following committees scrutinize in detail the report of the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India?
(a) 	Public Accounts Committee
(b) 	Estimates Committee
(c) 	Select Committee of Expenditure
(d) 	Consultative Committee of the Finance Ministry
16. The Speaker is the ex-officio Chairman of the:
(a) 	Rules Committee
(b) 	Committee of privileges
(c) 	Committee on public undertakings
(d) 	Committee on government assurances
17. Which of the following Committees consist of representatives of both the Houses namely Lok
Sabha and Rajya Sabha?
1. 	Estimates Committee
2. 	Committee on Subordinate Legislation
3. 	Public Accounts Committee
4. 	Committee on Public Undertakings
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 4 	(b) 1, 2 and 3
(c) 	3 and 4 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
18. Which of the following statements does not reflect the jurisdiction of the Estimates Committee?
(a) 	It suggests alternative policies in order to bring efficiency and economy in administration
(b) 	It examines whether the money is well laid out within the limits of the policy implied in the
estimates
(c) 	It suggests the form in which estimates are to be presented to Parliament
(d) 	It helps in checking Governmental extravagance in making demands as its report is debated
in the House
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 163] ---
III.56 | Objective Indian Polity
19. Which one of the following committees is constituted by the Lok Sabha but comprises members
of the Rajya Sabha also?
(a) 	Business Advisory Committee 	(b) Committee of Privileges
(c) 	Public Accounts Committee 	(d) Rules Committee
20. The report of Public Accounts Committee is presented to the:
(a) 	Prime Minister 	(b) Finance Minister
(c) 	President 	(d) Lok Sabha
21. 	Match List I with List II and select the correct answer by using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Parliamentary Committees) 	(Functions)
A. 	Rules Committee 	1. 	Examination of Appropriation Accounts
B. 	Public Accounts Committee 	2. 	Considers matters of procedure in the House
C. 	Committee on Subordinate 	3. 	Examination of rules made by the executive
Legislation 	departments under the Acts passed by the
Parliament
D. 	Committee on Public 	4. 	Review of the working of the
Undertakings 	public sector undertakings
5. 	Control of the department of public enterprises
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	1 	2 	3 	5
(b) 	2 	1 	3 	4
(c) 	3 	4 	1 	2
(d) 	5 	1 	2 	3
22. The Parliament exercises final control on public finance:
(a) 	Through the Public Accounts Committee
(b) 	Through the Estimates Committee
(c) 	Through the enactment of the Budget
(d) 	Through the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
23. The issue of whether a commitment made by a Minister on the floor of the House has been ful-
filled or not is decided by the:
(a) 	Consultative Committee attached to the Ministry concerned
(b) 	Select Committee dealing with the Ministry concerned
(c) 	Political Affairs Committee of the Union Cabinet
(d) 	Committee on Government Assurances
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 164] ---
Parliamentary Committees | III.57
24. Which one of the following Parliamentary Committees act as a ‘watchdog’ on departmental ex-
penditures and irregularities?
(a) 	Estimates Committee
(b) 	Committee on Public Undertakings
(c) 	Public Accounts Committee
(d) 	Committee on Government Assurances
25. Which of the following is/are true with respect to the Public Accounts Committee?
1. 	Its work is based on the audit reports of the CAG.
2. 	It examines the accounts of the Government of India for appropriations made by the Lok
Sabha.
3. 	It examines the accounts of autonomous and semi-autonomous bodies.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	1 and 2 	(d) Only 3
26. Consider the following statements:
1. 	Members of Rajya Sabha are not associated with the Committee on Public Undertakings.
2. 	Railway Convention Committee is an ad hoc Parliamentary Committee
Which of these statements is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 2 	(b) 1 and 2
(c) 	None 	(d) Only 1
27. Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Public Accounts Committee consists of 10 members from Lok Sabha and 5 members
from Rajya Sabha.
2. 	The Public Accounts Committee examines both the Appropriation and Finance Reports
submitted by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
28. When were 17 Departmental Related Standing Committees set up on the recommendations of
the Rules Committee of the Lok Sabha?
(a) 	1964 	(b) 1977
(c) 	1990 	(d) 1993
29. Which one of the following is not a function of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation?
(a) 	To evolve a systematic pattern of the terms of delegation
(b) 	To improve the methods of publicity of the rules
(c) 	To lay down rules and regulations on the table of the House
(d) 	To achieve uniformity in rule-making procedures
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 165] ---
III.58 | Objective Indian Polity
30. Statement I: 	The Annual Financial Statement presented in the Lok Sabha contains apart from
the estimates of expenditure, ways and means to raise revenue.
Statement II: After the Annual Financial Statement is presented in the Lok Sabha, the Estimates
Committee examines it.
Codes:
(a) 	Both the statements are individually true and Statement II is the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(b) 	Both the statements are individually true but Statement II is not the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(c) 	Statement I is true but Statement II is false.
(d) 	Statement I is false but Statement II is true.
31. Which one of the following statements is not correct?
(a) 	The main function of the Public Accounts Committee is to examine the Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(b) 	The Public Accounts Committee comprises Members of the Lok Sabha only.
(c) 	A member of opposition can also be appointed as the Chairman of the Public Accounts
Committee.
(d) 	A member of the Public Accounts Committee can be re-elected for a second term.
32. At present, the number of Standing Parliamentary Committees that exist to scrutinize the de-
mands for grants of various ministries is:
(a) 	Twenty-two 	(b) Twenty-six
(c) 	Twenty-four 	(d) Twenty-eight
33. The Estimates Committee of the Lok Sabha:
(a) 	Prepares estimates of expenditure of the Central Government
(b) 	Examines the accounts of Departments of Government of India
(c) 	Prevents unauthorized collection of taxes
(d) 	Suggests economies to be made in the Central administration
1. 	(b) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(c) 	4. 	(d) 	5. 	(a)
6. 	(a) 	7. 	(b) 	8. 	(a) 	9. 	(d) 	10. 	(c)
11. 	(a) 	12. 	(a) 	13. 	(c) 	14. 	(d) 	15. 	(a)
16. 	(a) 	17. 	(c) 	18. 	(d) 	19. 	(c) 	20. 	(d)
21. 	(b) 	22. 	(a) 	23. 	(d) 	24. 	(c) 	25. 	(a)
26. 	(a) 	27. 	(b) 	28. 	(d) 	29. 	(c) 	30. 	(b)
31. 	(b) 	32. 	(c) 	33. 	(d)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 166] ---
Parliamentary Forums | III.59
Parliamentary Forums
Twenty Four
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Parliamentary Forum on Population and Public Health is the first Parliamentary Forum.
2. 	The first Parliamentary Forum was established in 2004.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Statement I: 	The Parliamentary Forum will not interfere with the jurisdiction of 	the
Departmentally-Related Standing Committees of the Ministry concerned.
Statement II: The Chairman of Departmentally-Related Standing Committees are the ex-office
Vice-Presidents of the respective Forums.
Codes:
(a) 	Both the statements are individually true and Statement II is the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(b) 	Both the statements are individually true but Statement II is not the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(c) 	Statement I is true but Statement II is false.
(d) 	Statement I is false but Statement II is true.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 167] ---
III.60 | Objective Indian Polity
3. 	The Speaker of Lok Sabha is the President of all the Parliamentary Forums except the:
(a) 	Parliamentary Forum on Population and Public Health
(b) 	Parliamentary Forum on Global Warming and Climate Change
(c) 	Parliamentary Forum on Water Conservation and Management
(d) 	Parliamentary Forum on Children
4. 	What is the strength of a Parliamentary Forum (excluding the President and ex-officio Vice-
Presidents)?
(a) 	21 Members
(b) 	15 Members
(b) 	31 Members
(d) 	25 Members
5. 	Who is the Speaker of Lok Sabha when the first Parliamentary Forum was constituted?
(a) 	Ms. Meira Kumar
(b) 	Manohar Joshi
(c) 	Somnath Chatterjee
(d) 	G.M.C. Balayogi
6. 	Which one of the following is not a sub-forum of the Parliamentary Forum on Youth?
(a) 	Sub-Forum on Empowerment
(b) 	Sub-Forum on Health
(c) 	Sub-Forum on Education
(d) 	Sub-Forum on Employment
7. 	Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Parliamentary Forums) 	(Year of Establishment)
A. 	Parliamentary Forum on Population and Public Health 	1. 	2011
B. 	Parliamentary Forum on Disaster Management 	2. 	2006
C. 	Parliamentary Forum on Water Conservation and Management 	3. 	2004
D. 	Parliamentary Forum on Global Warming and Climate Change 	4. 	2005
5. 	2008
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	2 	3 	1 	4
(b) 	3 	1 	5 	2
(c) 	2 	1 	4 	5
(d) 	3 	2 	5 	1
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 168] ---
Parliamentary Forums | III.61
1. 	(d) 	2. 	(b) 	3. 	(a) 	4. 	(c) 	5. 	(c)
6. 	(a) 	7. 	(c)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 169] ---
III.62 | Objective Indian Polity
Supreme Court
Twenty Five
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	A retired Supreme Court Judge cannot act as a Judge of the Supreme Court even for a
temporary period.
2. 	A High Court Judge may be appointed as an ad hoc Judge of the Supreme Court for a
temporary period.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Supreme Court has original jurisdiction in any dispute between the Government of India
and one or more States.
2. 	The Supreme Court has original jurisdiction in any dispute between the Government of India
and any State or States on one side and one or more other States on the other.
3. 	The Supreme Court has original jurisdiction in any dispute between the Government of India
and any corporation or individual on one side and one or more States on the other.
4. 	The Supreme Court has original jurisdiction in any dispute between two or more States.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 170] ---
Supreme Court | III.63
Which of these statements are correct?
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 1, 2 and 4
(c) 	3 and 4 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
3. 	In which of the following categories of cases, the Supreme Court of India has the power to de-
cide?
1. 	A reference made by the President on a question of law or fact.
2. 	A case involving interpretation of the Constitution.
3. 	A case involving a substantial question of law of general importance.
4. 	A case where the constitutionality of any law has been challenged.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 1, 3 and 4
(c) 	1, 2 and 4 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
4. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Supreme Court of India can sit only in Delhi.
2. 	The Supreme Court of India can sit in places other than Delhi which the Chief Justice of
India may appoint with the approval of the President.
3. 	The Parliament may make provisions for conferring supplemental powers upon the Supreme
Court.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	1 and 3 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	Only 2 	(d) Only 3
5. 	Assertion (A): The Supreme Court is a Court of Record.
Reason (R): 	Once a Court is made a Court of Record, its power to punish for its contempt
necessarily follows from that position.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
6. 	In the appointment of the Judges of the Supreme Court, the recommendations of the collegium
consisting of the Chief Justice of India and four of the senior most Judges of the Supreme Court
is binding on the President of India, because:
(a) 	It is so provided in the Constitution of India
(b) 	It has been the consistent practice for a long time
(c) 	It has been laid down by the Parliament
(d) 	It has been laid down by the Supreme Court
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 171] ---
III.64 | Objective Indian Polity
7. 	Which one of the following statements regarding the exercise of judicial review is not correct?
(a) 	A case must be brought before the Supreme Court regarding the validity of a law.
(b) 	Unanimous opinion of all the judges is necessary for declaring a law null and void.
(c) 	Legislative enactments and executive orders may be struck down by the Supreme Court.
(d) 	The power is implicit in the provisions of Article 13 of the Constitution.
8. 	Article 141 of the Constitution lays down that the law declared by Supreme Court shall be binding
on all courts within the territory of India. Therefore, the Supreme Court:
(a) 	Is bound by its earlier decisions as the expression “all courts” include Supreme Court also.
(b) 	Is not bound by its own decisions and may reverse a previous decision.
(c) 	Can reverse a previous decision only when a new legislation is enacted having the effect of
abrogating decision.
(d) 	Can reverse a previous decision only when that previous decision was given as a result of
overlooking another previous decision.
9. 	Which one of the following is directly related to the Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
of India?
(a) 	Appeals made in civil, criminal and constitutional cases
(b) 	Appeals made in constitutional cases only
(c) 	Adjudication of disputes between the Union and the States
(d) 	Adjudication of disputes between the States
10. How can the number of Judges in the Supreme Court of India be increased?
(a) 	By a Presidential notification
(b) 	By a Parliamentary Act
(c) 	By an Amendment of the Constitution of India
(d) 	By a Representation from the Supreme Court
11. Assertion (A): Judicial Review is a process to restrain the executive or the legislature from
exercising power which may not be sanctioned by the Constitution.
Reason (R): 	The source of the power of judicial review is Article 13 of the Constitution.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
12. Consider the following statements:
1. 	Parliament can extend, but cannot curtail the jurisdiction and power of the Supreme Court.
2. 	No discussion can take place in Parliament with respect to the conduct of any judge of the
Supreme Court in the discharge of his duties.
3. 	A retired judge of the Supreme Court cannot appear or plead in any court or before any
authority within the territory of India.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 172] ---
Supreme Court | III.65
4. 	The salaries and allowances of the judges of the Supreme Court are charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India.
Which of these statements are correct?
(a) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(b) 1 and 2
(c) 	1 and 3 	(d) 2 and 4
13. Which one of the following categories of disputes is excluded from the original jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court?
(a) 	Between the Government of India and one or more States
(b) 	Between two or more States inter se
(c) 	Between residents of two or more States
(d) 	Between the Government of India and one or more states on one side and one or more other
States on the other
14. In order to remove a judge of the Supreme Court, the President is required by the Constitution to
receive an address by each House of Parliament supported by a majority of the total membership
of the House, and by a prescribed majority of members of the House present and voting. The
prescribed majority is
(a) 	One-third 	(b) One-half
(c) 	Two-thirds 	(d) Three-fourths
15. Which one of the following is not an essential condition for appointment as a judge of the Su-
preme Court?
(a) 	A citizen of India
(b) 	At least five years’ experience as judge of a High Court or of two or more such Courts in
succession
(c) 	Must have completed 35 years of age
(d) 	At least ten years’ experience as an advocate of a High Court or of two or more such Courts
in succession
16. The rules for regulating the practice and procedure of the Supreme Court are made by the:
(a) 	President of India
(b) 	Supreme Court with the approval of the President of India
(c) 	Supreme Court alone
(d) 	Supreme Court in consultation with the Bar Council of India
17. Assertion (A): The rule-making power of the Supreme Court is not subject to any law made by
the Parliament of India.
Reason (R): 	Only an impartial and independent judiciary can protect the rights of the individual
without fear or favour.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 173] ---
III.66 | Objective Indian Polity
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
18. When the Chief Justice of India is appointed by the President, he is required to consult:
(a) 	The Council of Ministers and all the Judges of the Supreme Court
(b) 	The Prime Minister, the Law Minister and the Attorney-General of India
(c) 	Such of the Ministers of the Cabinet and the Prime Minister as he deems necessary
(d) 	Such of the Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts as he deems necessary
19. Which one of the following statements is not correct?
(a) 	A retired judge of Supreme Court is prohibited from appearing and pleading in any court
within the territory of India.
(b) 	Supreme Court may issue writs for the enforcement of any legal right within the territory of
India.
(c) 	Supreme Court has the power to punish any person for its contempt.
(d) 	Salary of Judges of the Supreme Court is not subject to vote of the legislature.
20. Consider the following statements regarding the Advisory Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court:
1. 	The reference for advice may be made to the Supreme Court on a question of law or fact by
the President of India.
2. 	Disputes arising out of pre-constitution treaties and agreements excluded from the original
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court may also be referred to it.
3. 	The advice given by the Supreme Court is binding on the Government.
4. 	One of the cases referred to the Supreme Court for its advice was the constitutionality of the
Kerala Education Bill.
Which of these are correct?
(a) 	1, 2 and 4 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	1 and 2 	(d) 3 and 4
21. Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in appeals from High Courts in regard to civil matters
pertains only to a:
(a) 	Substantial question of law
(b) 	Question of law
(c) 	Question of fact
(d) 	Mixed question of fact and law
22. The Supreme Court of India is different from its counterpart in the U.S.A.:
(a) 	In its role as the guardian of the Constitution
(b) 	In its advisory role
(c) 	In its role as the supreme authority in the judicial field in the country
(d) 	In its writ jurisdiction
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 174] ---
Supreme Court | III.67
23. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer by using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Jurisdiction of Supreme Court) 	(Type of Cases)
A. 	Appellate Jurisdiction 	1. 	Acts as a court of record and also has power to
review its own judgements
B. 	Advisory Jurisdiction 	2. 	Any question of law or fact of public importance
referred
C. 	Miscellaneous Powers 	3. 	Civil cases, criminal cases and constitutional cases
D. 	Original Jurisdiction 	4. 	Acts as a federal court
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	3 	2 	1 	4
(b) 	2 	3 	1 	4
(c) 	3 	4 	2 	1
(d) 	2 	4 	3 	1
24. Law declared by the Supreme Court shall be binding on all the courts within the territory of India.
Here ‘courts’ mean
(a) 	All courts including the Supreme Court of India
(b) 	All courts except the Supreme Court of India
(c) 	All courts including the Supreme Court except such benches of the Supreme Court which
consists of seven judges or more
(d) 	All courts including Supreme Court except a bench of the Supreme Court which consists of
all the judges of the Supreme Court
25. Which one of the following statements is correct?
If the Chief Justice of India is to make a request for attendance of a Judge of a High Court at the
sitting of the Supreme Court as an ad hoc judge:
(a) 	Only previous consent of the President of India is required.
(b) 	Previous consent of the President of India and consultation with the Chief Justice of the
concerned High Court is required.
(c) 	Only consultation with the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court is required.
(d) 	Neither previous consent of the President of India nor consultation with the Chief Justice
of the concerned High Court is required.
26. Which of the following has jurisdiction to decide a dispute between Central Government and a
State Government?
(a) 	Inter-State Council
(b) 	High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 175] ---
III.68 | Objective Indian Polity
(c) 	Supreme Court under Article 143 of the Constitution of India
(d) 	Supreme Court under Article 131 of the Constitution of India
27. Assertion (A): The Supreme Court is a court of record.
Reason (R): 	It delivers judgements in open court.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
28. Which one of the following statements is correct?
(a) 	The original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is unlimited
(b) 	A dispute between one State and another can only be dealt with by the Supreme Court
(c) 	The Supreme Court must admit appeal from any judgement or order made by any court
(d) 	All courts including the Supreme Court are bound by a Supreme Court decision
29. Which one of the following statements is correct?
The power of judicial review means the power of the Supreme Court to:
(a) 	Set aside any executive decision if it is against statutory law.
(b) 	Set aside any provision of law if it is contrary to the Fundamental Rights.
(c) 	Examine constitutional validity of any administrative action as well as legislative provision
and strike it down if not found in accordance with the constitutional provisions.
(d) 	Review its own decisions or decisions of any court or tribunal within the territory of India.
30. What is the correct chronological sequence of the following advisory opinions given by the Su-
preme Court under Article 143 of the Constitution of India?
1. 	Delhi Laws Act
2. 	Berubari Union
3. 	Sea Customs Act
4. 	Special Courts Bill
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2, 3, 4 	(b) 2, 1, 3, 4
(c) 	2, 3, 4, 1 	(d) 2, 4, 3, 1
31. The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of India may be enlarged by:
(a) 	Parliament by law
(b) 	Parliament by resolution
(c) 	The President
(d) 	The President in consultation with the Chief Justice of India
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 176] ---
Supreme Court | III.69
32. What age is prescribed for a person to qualify for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court
of India?
(a) 	Not below 30 years on the date of appointment
(b) 	Not below 35 years on the date of appointment
(c) 	Not below 40 years on the date of appointment
(d) 	No age is prescribed
33. Assertion (A): The Supreme Court of India is bound by its own judgements.
Reason (R): 	The highest court binds all subordinate courts by its own judgements.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
34. Judicial Review in the Indian Constitution is based on:
(a) 	Procedure established by law 	(b) Due process of Law
(c) 	Rule of Law 	(d) Precedents and conventions
35. Disputes between States come to the Supreme Court under:
(a) 	Appellate jurisdiction 	(b) Original jurisdiction
(c) 	Advisory jurisdiction 	(d) Writ jurisdiction
36. Consider the following statements:
1. 	Supreme Court’s power to issue writs is narrower than that of High Court.
2. 	A citizen is free to approach High Court or Supreme Court as he chooses whenever his
fundamental rights are violated.
3. 	The law declared by the Supreme Court is binding on all courts throughout India.
Which of the above statement(s) is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) 1 and 2
(c) 	1, 2 and 3 	(d) 2 and 3
37. Which of the following statements regarding Supreme Court of India are correct?
1. 	It has the power to entertain appeal from any court or tribunal within India.
2. 	It has the power to deliver advisory opinion on any question of fact or law referred to it by the
President.
3. 	Salaries of the Judges of the Supreme Court are subject to vote by the Parliament.
4. 	Its jurisdiction is binding on all other courts within India.
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 3 	(b) 2 and 4
(c) 	2, 3 and 4 	(d) 1, 2 and 4
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 177] ---
III.70 | Objective Indian Polity
1. 	(b) 	2. 	(B) 	3. 	(d) 	4. 	(b) 	5. 	(b)
6. 	(d) 	7. 	(b) 	8. 	(b) 	9. 	(a) 	10. 	(b)
11. 	(b) 	12. 	(a) 	13. 	(c) 	14. 	(c) 	15. 	(c)
16. 	(b) 	17. 	(d) 	18. 	(d) 	19. 	(b) 	20. 	(a)
21. 	(a) 	22. 	(b) 	23. 	(a) 	24. 	(b) 	25. 	(b)
26. 	(d) 	27. 	(b) 	28. 	(b) 	29. 	(c) 	30. 	(a)
31. 	(a) 	32. 	(d) 	33. 	(d) 	34. 	(a) 	35. 	(b)
36. 	(c) 	37. 	(d)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 178] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 179] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 180] ---
State
Government
Four
Twenty Six 	Governor
Twenty Seven Chief Minister
Twenty Eight 	State Council of Ministers
Twenty Nine 	State Legislature
Thirty 	High Court
Thirty One 	Subordinate Courts
Thirty Two 	Special Status of Jammu & Kashmir
Thirty Three 	Special Provisions for Some States
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 181] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam