
--- [PDF PAGE 322] ---
Co-operative Societies
Fifty Seven
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Parliament may make provisions for the incorporation and regulation of co-operative
societies.
2. 	The maximum number of directors of a co-operative society shall not exceed twenty-five.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Which of the following constitutional amendment acts gave a constitutional status and protection
to the co-operative societies?
(a) 	95th Amendment 	(b) 96th Amendment
(c) 	97th Amendment 	(d) 98th Amendment
3. 	Which part of the Constitution of India contain provisions with respect to the co-operative soci-
eties?
(a) 	Part IX 	(b) Part IX-B
(c) 	Part IX-A 	(d) Part XI
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 323] ---
IX.6 | Objective Indian Polity
4. 	Which of the following sets of the Articles of the Constitution of India deal with the co-operative
societies?
(a) 	Articles 243-ZH to 243-ZT 	(b) Articles 243-ZI to 243-ZT
(c) 	Articles 243-ZH to 243-ZS 	(d) Articles 243-ZG to 243-ZS
5. 	Statement I: 	The accounts of every co-operative society shall be audited within one year of the
close of the financial year.
Statement II: The audit report of the accounts of an apex co-operative society shall be laid
before the state legislature.
Codes:
(a) 	Both the statements are individually true and Statement II is the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(b) 	Both the statements are individually true but Statement II is not the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(c) 	Statement I is true but Statement II is false.
(d) 	Statement I is false but Statement II is true.
6. 	Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Articles Related to 	(Matter Dealt With)
Co-operative Societies)
A. 	Article 243-ZI 	1. 	Right of a Member to get Information
B. 	Article 243-ZO 	2. 	Incorporation of Co-operative Societies
C. 	Article 243-ZR 	3. 	Supersession and Suspension of Board
D. 	Article 243-ZL 	4. 	Election of Members of Board
5. 	Application to Multi-state Co-operative
Societies
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	1 	4 	3 	2
(b) 	2 	5 	1 	4
(c) 	2 	1 	5 	3
(d) 	1 	5 	3 	2
1. 	(d) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(b) 	4. 	(a) 	5. 	(d)
6. 	(c)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 324] ---
Official Language | IX.7
Official Language
Fifty Eight
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	Parliament of India may make any one or more of the languages in use in a State or Hindi as
the official language of that State.
2. 	The Official Language Act lays down that English should be used for purposes of
communication between the Union and non-Hindi States.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Which of the following sets of Articles of the Constitution of India contain provisions pertaining
to the official language?
(a) 	Articles 347 to 353
(b) 	Articles 346 to 354
(c) 	Articles 342 to 352
(d) 	Articles 343 to 351
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 325] ---
IX.8 | Objective Indian Polity
3. 	Statement I: 	The Supreme Court hears only those who petition or appeal in English and not in
Hindi.
Statement II: The Parliament has not made any provision for the use of Hindi in the Supreme
Court.
Codes:
(a) 	Both the statements are individually true and Statement II is the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(b) 	Both the statements are individually true but Statement II is not the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(c) 	Statement I is true but Statement II is false.
(d) 	Statement I is false but Statement II is true.
4. 	In which of the following years, the Parliament enacted the Official Language Act?
(a) 	1963 	(b) 1965
(c) 	1957 	(d) 1955
5. 	Sindhi was included in the Eight Schedule of the Constitution of India by the:
(a) 	21st Amendment Act 	(b) 15th Amendment Act
(c) 	27th Amendment Act 	(d) 23rd Amendment Act
6. 	Which Part of the Constitution of India deals with the official language?
(a) 	Part XVI 	(b) Part XVII
(c) 	Part XVIII 	(d) Part XIV
7. 	Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(States) 	(Official Languages)
A. 	Meghalaya 	1. 	Hindi
B. 	Jammu & Kashmir 	2. 	Konkani
C. 	Jharkhand 	3. 	English
D. 	Goa 	4. 	Kashmiri
5. 	Urdu
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	1 	4 	2 	3
(b) 	3 	5 	1 	2
(c) 	3 	4 	1 	2
(d) 	1 	5 	2 	3
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 326] ---
Official Language | IX.9
8. 	In 1955, the President appointed an Official Language Commission under the chairmanship of:
(a) 	G.B. Pant 	(b) S.K. Dhar
(c) 	B.G. Kher 	(d) H.N. Kunzru
1. 	(b) 	2. 	(d) 	3. 	(a) 	4. 	(a) 	5. 	(a)
6. 	(b) 	7. 	(b) 	8. 	(c)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 327] ---
IX.10 | Objective Indian Polity
Public Services
Fifty Nine
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	A new all-India service can be created if both the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha declare by a
resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting that it is
necessary or expedient in the national interest to do so.
2. 	There is no provision in the Constitution of India as to what level of authority can dismiss a
member of a civil service of the Union or an all-India service or a civil service of a State.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The personnel of the All-India Services serve in the Central Government, Union Territories
and States.
2. 	They bring a national perspective to their jobs.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 328] ---
Public Services | IX.11
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
3. 	In the context of All-India Service, which one of the following finds mention in Article 312 of
the Constitution of India?
(a) 	All-India Service of Engineers 	(b) All-India Revenue Service
(c) 	All-India Judicial Service 	(d) All-India Medical and Health Service
4. 	A new All-India service can be created by
(a) 	An amendment of the Constitution
(b) 	An executive order
(c) 	A resolution under Article 312 of the Constitution
(d) 	A statute
5. 	Assertion (A): Recruitment to the public services is to be regulated by the Acts of appropriate
legislatures.
Reason (R): 	The Constitution does not have provisions to regulate the recruitment of the civil
servants.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A.
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A.
(c) 	A is true but R is false.
(d) 	A is false but R is true.
6. 	According to the Constitution of India, a new All India Service can be instituted with the initiative
taken by
(a) 	More than two-thirds of the States 	(b) The Inter-State Council
(c) 	The Lok Sabha 	(d) The Rajya Sabha
7. 	Which of the following services under the Government of India are termed as All-India Services?
(a) 	IAS, IPS and Indian Foreign Service 	(b) IAS only
(c) 	IAS and IPS only 	(d) IAS, IPS and Indian Forest Service
8. 	The Article in the Constitution of India that says that the Parliament may by law, provide for the
creation of an All India Service is:
(a) 	Article 300 	(b) Article 312
(c) 	Article 320 	(d) Article 420
9. 	Which of the following Amendments made a provision for the creation of All-India Judicial Ser-
vice?
(a) 	44th Amendment 	(b) 38th Amendment
(c) 	57th Amendment 	(d) 42nd Amendment
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 329] ---
IX.12 | Objective Indian Polity
10. Assertion (A): The Rajya Sabha under Article 312 is empowered to create new All India Services
in the national interest.
Reason (R): 	The Rajya Sabha can define national interest better.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
11. Which one of the following is a Central Service?
(a) 	Educational Service 	(b) Agricultural Service
(c) 	Overseas Communication Service 	(d) Cooperative Service
12. Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act, 1976, provides the right of the government servant
to make a representation against the penalty proposed to be imposed on him.
2. 	The right of the Government of India to dismiss a government servant at its pleasure cannot
be fettered by any contract.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
13. In pursuance of which Article of the Constitution of India are the conditions of service including
recruitment to the Central Services regulated by a large number of rules?
(a) 	Article 309 	(b) Article 310
(c) 	Article 311 	(d) Article 312
14. Statement I: 	There is a feeling that the institution of All-India Services needs reconsideration.
Statement II: Members of the All-India Services foster national integration, as they are recruited
from different parts of the country.
Codes:
(a) 	Both the statements are individually true and Statement II is the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(b) 	Both the statements are individually true but Statement II is not the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(c) 	Statement I is true but Statement II is false.
(d) 	Statement I is false but Statement II is true.
15. The Articles in the Indian Constitution that are grouped under Services under the Union and the
States are:
(a) 	Articles 310 to 323 	(b) Articles 308 to 323
(c) 	Articles 306 to 323 	(d) Articles 305 to 323
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 330] ---
Public Services | IX.13
16. Which among the following is empowered to create more All-India Services?
(a) 	Rajya Sabha 	(b) Union Parliament
(c) 	Lok Sabha 	(d) Union Cabinet
17. Which one of the following Articles of the Constitution of India provides that every person who
is a member of a defence service or of civil service of the Union or of All-India Services holds
the office during the pleasure of the President of India?
(a) 	Article 310 	(b) Article 315
(c) 	Article 323 	(d) Article 323A
1. 	(d) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(c) 	4. 	(d) 	5. 	(a)
6. 	(d) 	7. 	(d) 	8. 	(b) 	9. 	(d) 	10. 	(d)
11. 	(c) 	12. 	(d) 	13. 	(a) 	14. 	(b) 	15. 	(b)
16. 	(b) 	17. 	(a)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 331] ---
IX.14 | Objective Indian Polity
Tribunals
Sixty
1. 	Part XIV-A of the Constitution of India deals with which of the following:
1. 	Administrative tribunals
2. 	Adjudication or trial by tribunals in respect of enforcement of any tax
3. 	Adjudication or trial by tribunals in respect of ceiling on urban property
4. 	Adjudication or trial by tribunals in respect of industrial and labour disputes
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(b) 1, 2 and 3
(c) 	3 and 4 	(d) 1 and 4
2. 	The Central Administrative Tribunal adjudicates disputes and complaints with respect to the ser-
vice of persons who are:
(a) 	Appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union except
members of the Defence services
(b) 	Officials and servants of the Supreme Court or High Courts
(c) 	Members of the Secretarial staff of the Parliament or State Legislatures
(d) 	Members of the Defence Services
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 332] ---
Tribunals | IX.15
3. 	Which one of the following is a Quasi-judicial authority?
(a) 	Central Vigilance Commission
(b) 	National Commission for Women
(c) 	Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
(d) 	Administrative Tribunal
4. 	The Central Administrative Tribunal was set up on the recommendation of:
(a) 	The Ministry of Law and Justice 	(b) The Administrative Reforms Commission
(c) 	The Law Commission 	(d) The Sarkaria Commission
5. 	In which one of the following cases, did the Supreme Court rule that the power of judicial review
vested in the High Courts in respect of the decisions given by the Service Tribunals, cannot be
ousted or excluded even by a Constitutional Amendment?
(a) 	High Court of Judicature at Bombay v. Shirish Kumar
(b) 	Sampath Kumar v. Union of India
(c) 	Chandra Kumar v. Union of India
(d) 	All India Judges Association v. Union of India
6. 	The Parliament passed the Administrative Tribunals Act in:
(a) 	1985 	(b) 1975
(c) 	1982 	(d) 1987
7. 	The chairman of a State Administrative Tribunal is appointed by the
(a) 	Governor of the State 	(b) Chief Justice of the State High Court
(c) 	Speaker of the State Legislative Assembly 	(d) President of India
8. 	Which Article of the Constitution of India deals with administrative tribunals?
(a) 	Article 322 	(b) Article 323
(c) 	Article 323-A 	(d) Article 323-B
9. 	Which of the following Constitutional Amendment Acts included Part XIV-A (entitled as ‘Tribu-
nals’) in the Constitution of India?
(a) 	42nd Amendment Act 	(b) 44th Amendment Act
(c) 	47th Amendment Act 	(d) 49th Amendment Act
1. 	(a) 	2. 	(a) 	3. 	(d) 	4. 	(b) 	5. 	(c)
6. 	(a) 	7. 	(d) 	8. 	(c) 	9. 	(a)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 333] ---
IX.16 | Objective Indian Polity
Rights and Liabilities
of the Government
Sixty One
1. 	Which one of the following was affirmed by the Supreme Court, with respect to the sovereign
immunity of the State?
(a) 	Doctrine of sovereign immunity has relevance in the present day context.
(b) 	State can succeed in pleading its immunity by showing that the tort was committed by its
servants in the course of discharge of statutory functions.
(c) 	State cannot claim sovereign immunity if its officers are negligent in exercise of their powers.
(d) 	State can claim sovereign immunity even if its officers are negligent in exercise of their
powers.
2. 	Article 361 of the Constitution of India guarantees the privilege to the President of India that, he
shall:
(a) 	Not participate in Parliamentary proceedings
(b) 	Only be answerable to the Chief Justice of India
(c) 	Address both the Houses of Parliament at the time of joint session
(d) 	Not be answerable to any court for the exercise of the powers of his office
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 334] ---
Rights and Liabilities of the Government 	| IX.17
3. 	Which part of the Constitution of India deals with the rights and liabilities of the Government?
(a) 	Part XII 	(b) Part XI
(c) 	Part IX 	(d) Part XIII
4. 	Assertion (A): Article 300 of the Constitution of India has specifically removed the distinction
between sovereign and non-sovereign functions with respect to government’s
liability for tort in India.
Reason (R): 	Government is liable for tort which is the result of its non-sovereign function.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
5. 	No criminal proceedings shall be instituted or continued against which one of the following in any
court during the term of his office?
(a) 	President, Vice-President and Governor
(b) 	President, Prime Minister and Governor
(c) 	President and Governor only
(d) 	President, Vice-President and Prime Minister
1. 	(c) 	2. 	(d) 	3. 	(a) 	4. 	(d) 	5. 	(c)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 335] ---
IX.18 | Objective Indian Polity
Authoritative Text of the
Constitution in Hindi
Language
Sixty Two
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	Originally, the Constitution of India did not make any provision with respect to an authoritative
text of the Constitution in the Hindi language.
2. 	Later, a provision in this regard was made in 1978.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The President shall cause to be published under his authority the translation of the Constitution
in Hindi language.
2. 	The President shall cause to be published under his authority the translation in Hindi of every
amendment of the Constitution made in English.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 336] ---
Authoritative Text of the Constitution in Hindi Language | IX.19
3. 	In pursuance of which of the following Articles of the Constitution of India, the President pub-
lished an authoritative text of the Constitution in the Hindi language?
(a) 	Article 393
(b) 	Article 394
(c) 	Article 394-A
(d) 	Article 395
4. 	Which of the following Parts of the Constitution of India deals with the authoritative text of the
Constitution in the Hindi language?
(a) 	Part XXI
(b) 	Part XIX
(c) 	Part XVII
(d) 	Part XXII
5. 	Which of the following Constitutional Amendment Acts made a provision with respect to an
authoritative text of the Constitution of India in the Hindi language?
(a) 	56th Amendment Act
(b) 	58th Amendment Act
(c) 	54th Amendment Act
(d) 	55th Amendment Act
6. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The translation of the constitution and its every amendment published shall be construed to
have the same meaning as the original text in English.
2. 	The translation of the constitution and its every amendment published shall be deemed to be,
for all purposes, its authoritative text in Hindi.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
7. 	Statement I: 	The Constitution of India adopted by the Constituent Assembly on November
26, 1949, was in the English Language.
Statement II: A Hindi translation of the Constitution, signed by the members of the Constituent
Assembly, was also published in 1950 under the authority of the President of the
Constituent Assembly.
Codes:
(a) 	Both the statements are individually true and Statement II is the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(b) 	Both the statements are individually true but Statement II is not the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(c) 	Statement I is true but Statement II is false.
(d) 	Statement I is false but Statement II is true.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 337] ---
IX.20 | Objective Indian Polity
1. 	(a) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(c) 	4. 	(d) 	5. 	(b)
6. 	(c) 	7. 	(b)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 338] ---
Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes | IX.21
Special Provisions Relating
to Certain Classes
Sixty Three
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	There was a special provision for the Anglo-Indian community in certain services.
2. 	The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act was passed in
1955.
3. 	The Untouchability (Offences) Act was renamed as the Protection of Civil Rights Act.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 1 and 2
(c) 	2 and 3 	(d) 1 and 3
2. 	Which one of the following is the correct chronological order of setting up of the given Commis-
sions concerning weaker sections of the Indian society?
(a) 	Kaka Saheb Kalelkar Commission – National Commission for Minorities – National
Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes – Mandal Commission
(b) 	National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes – National Commission
for Minorities – Kaka Saheb Kalelkar Commission – Mandal Commission
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 339] ---
IX.22 | Objective Indian Polity
(c) 	Kaka Saheb Kalelkar Commission – Mandal Commission – National Commission for
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes – National Commission for Minorities
(d) 	National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes – Mandal Commission –
Kaka Saheb Kalelkar Commission – National Commission for Minorities
3. 	The constitutional authority vested with the power of declaring castes or tribes as the Scheduled
Castes or Scheduled Tribes is the:
(a) 	Parliament
(b) 	Home Minister
(c) 	President of India
(d) 	Chairman, SC/ST Commission
4. 	Which one of the following is not a function of the National Commission for Backward Classes?
(a) 	To examine requests for inclusion of a class of citizens as a backward class.
(b) 	To hear complaints of under-inclusion of any backward class.
(c) 	To hear complaints of over-inclusion of any backward class.
(d) 	To identify the creamy layer among the backward classes.
5. 	Which of the following constitutional amendment acts provide for making of any provision in
favour of the SCs and STs for relaxation in qualifying marks in any examination or lowering the
standards of evaluation, for reservation in matters of promotion to the public services of the
Centre and the States?
(a) 	74th Amendment 	(b) 82nd Amendment
(c) 	86th Amendment 	(d) 94th Amendment
6. 	What is the main object of protective discrimination in India?
(a) 	To give special advantages to a particular group
(b) 	To raise a disadvantaged group to a level where it can compete with other sections of society
on equal footing
(c) 	To give financial assistance to the poor
(d) 	To promote class interest
1. 	(d) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(c) 	4. 	(d) 	5. 	(b)
6. 	(b)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 340] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 341] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 342] ---
Political
Dynamics
Ten
Sixty Four 	Political Parties
Sixty Five 	Elections
Sixty Six 	Electoral Reforms
Sixty Seven 	Anti-Defection Law
Sixty Eight 	Pressure Groups
Sixty Nine 	National Integration
Seventy 	Foreign Policy
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 343] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 344] ---
Political Parties
Sixty Four
1. 	Which one of the following scholars described the party system prevailing in India in the early
years of independence as one-party-dominant system?
(a) 	Bhikhu Parekh 	(b) Paul Brass
(c) 	Granville Austin 	(d) Rajni Kothari
2. 	Which of the following correctly indicates the features of regional political parties in India?
1. 	Regional political parties identify with region’s culture.
2. 	Regional political parties use regional language for their electoral gains.
3. 	Regional political parties enter into electoral alliance with national parties.
4. 	Regional political parties are a post-independence political phenomenon.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 1, 2 and 3
(c) 	1, 3 and 4 	(d) 2 only
3. 	On the basis of the criterion issued by the Election Commission of India, what is the minimum
number of states in which a political party must be recognised to be termed as a ‘national party’
throughout the whole of India?
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 345] ---
X.6 | Objective Indian Polity
(a) 	3 states 	(b) 4 states
(c) 	5 states 	(d) 6 states
4. 	Which one of the following functions pertains only to political party and not to pressure group?
(a) 	Collecting money for the organisation
(b) 	Contesting political election with own symbol
(c) 	Organising public meetings and rallies
(d) 	Publishing pamphlets and leaflets
5. 	Consider the following political parties of India:
1. 	DMK 	2. CPI (M)
3. 	AGP 	4. TDP
Which one of the following is the correct chronology of their formation?
(a) 	1-2-4-3 	(b) 1-2-3-4
(c) 	2-1-4-3 	(d) 4-3-2-1
6. 	Who among the following advocated party-less democracy in India?
(a) 	Mahatma Gandhi 	(b) M.N. Roy
(c) 	Jayaprakash Narayan 	(d) Acharya Vinoba Bhave
7. 	The basic problem in the working of parliamentary system in India arises out of:
(a) 	Lack of a cohesive and viable party system
(b) 	The absence of an efficient and independent bureaucracy
(c) 	Lack of clear constitutional provisions
(d) 	Weak political executive on account of its dependence on the legislature
8. 	Which one of the following statements is not correct?
(a) 	Communist Party of India was formed in 1925
(b) 	Bharatiya Janata Party was formed in 1978
(c) 	Shiromani Akali Dal was formed in 1920
(d) 	AIADMK was formed in 1972
9. 	Growth of regional political parties in India is attributed to which of the following?
1. 	Diversified nature of Indian Society
2. 	Inability to accommodate demands of various sections of society
3. 	Regional imbalances in the development
4. 	Factional fight within the larger parties
Select the correct answer by using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(b) 1, 3 and 4
(c) 	1, 2 and 3 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 346] ---
Political Parties | X.7
1. 	(d) 	2. 	(b) 	3. 	(b) 	4. 	(b) 	5. 	(a)
6. 	(c) 	7. 	(a) 	8. 	(b) 	9. 	(a)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 347] ---
X.8 | Objective Indian Polity
Elections
Sixty Five
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The party system and the elections in India are based on single member constituencies, first-
past-the-post system and a bicameral legislature.
2. 	The first general elections (Parliamentary Elections) were held in India in the year 1950
following the ratification of the Constitution.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	In which of the following circumstances, are the courts debarred from interfering in electoral mat-
ters?
1. 	Delimitation of constituencies
2. 	Allotment of seats to the constituencies
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 348] ---
Elections | X.9
3. 	The registration of political parties is done as per the provisions/decision of:
(a) 	Article 324 of the Constitution
(b) 	The Representation of the People Act, 1951
(c) 	The Election Commission by itself
(d) 	The Election Commission in consultation with cabinet committee on political affairs
4. 	The area of a Lok Sabha constituency for the purpose of general election is determined by the:
(a) 	Delimitation Commission
(b) 	Election Commission of India
(c) 	Census Commission
(d) 	President
5. 	Which of the following are the true functions of the electoral process in a democracy like India?
1. 	To keep the government responsive to the popular will
2. 	To bring together citizens to choose public decision makers
3. 	To change the government periodically if necessary
4. 	To support a competitive party system
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 1, 2 and 3
(c) 	1, 3 and 4 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
6. 	The ‘first-past-the-post’ electoral system, prevalent in India, refers to:
(a) 	A system of proportional representation of weighted voting in a multi-member constituency
(b) 	Single ballot, plural member majority voting system
(c) 	An electoral system in which the person winning the most votes of the votes cast in a
constituency (single ballot, single member) is declared elected
(d) 	A system in which the winning candidate has to secure a plurality as well as majority of the
votes cast
1. 	(a) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(b) 	4. 	(a) 	5. 	(b)
6. 	(c)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 349] ---
X.10 | Objective Indian Polity
Electoral Reforms
Sixty Six
1. 	The Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2003, passed by the Parliament of India
sought to:
(a) 	Provide the facility to opt to vote through proxy to the service voters belonging to armed
forces
(b) 	Introduce open ballot system for elections to the Council of States
(c) 	Insert provision regarding supply of copies of electoral rolls to candidates of recognized
political parties
(d) 	Make it mandatory for political parties to report all cases of contributions received above
Rs.20,000 to Election Commission
2. 	Indrajit Gupta Committee is related to:
(a) 	Registration of political parties 	(b) Criminalisation of politics
(c) 	State funding of elections 	(d) Anti-defection law
3. 	The Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs) were used for the first time in 1999 in the general elec-
tions (entire state) to the Legislative Assembly of:
(a) 	Goa 	(b) Rajasthan
(c) 	Madhya Pradesh 	(d) Kerala
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 350] ---
Electoral Reforms | X.11
4. 	Which of the following Constitutional Amendment Acts reduced the voting age from 21 years to
18 years for the Lok Sabha as well as the assembly elections?
(a) 	56th Amendment 	(b) 59th Amendment
(c) 	61st Amendment 	(d) 63rd Amendment
5. 	What was the subject of the Vohra Committee?
(a) 	Reform of the electoral laws
(b) 	Nexus between crime and politics
(c) 	Registration of political parties
(d) 	Judicial interference in electoral matters
6. 	Which of the following are included in booth capturing?
1. 	Seizure of a polling station and making polling authorities surrender ballot papers or voting
machines.
2. 	Taking possession of polling station and allowing only one’s own supporters to exercise their
franchise.
3. 	Threatening and preventing any elector from going to polling station.
4. 	Seizure of the place being used for counting of votes.
Select the correct answer by using the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 only 	(b) 2 and 3 only
(c) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(d) 3 and 4 only
7. 	Dinesh Goswami Committee on electoral reforms was appointed by the:
(a) 	United Front Government
(b) 	BJP-led coalition Government
(c) 	United Progressive Alliance Government
(d) 	National Front Government
1. 	(b) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(a) 	4. 	(c) 	5. 	(b)
6. 	(c) 	7. 	(d)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 351] ---
X.12 | Objective Indian Polity
Anti-Defection Law
Sixty Seven
1. 	Disqualification on the ground of defection for a Member of Parliament will not apply:
(a) 	If he goes out of his party as a result of a merger of the party with another party.
(b) 	If he has voluntarily given up his membership of the political party.
(c) 	If he abstains from voting in the house contrary to the direction of the political party.
(d) 	If a nominated member of a House joins a political party after six months.
2. 	Which one of the following Amendments to the Constitution of India sought to curb the political
defection?
(a) 	42nd Amendment 	(b) 52nd Amendment
(c) 	62nd Amendment 	(d) 70 th Amendment
3. 	Which one of the following Schedules of the Constitution of India includes the disqualification
of a Legislator on grounds of defection?
(a) 	8th Schedule 	(b) 7th Schedule
(c) 	9th Schedule 	(d) 10th Schedule
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 352] ---
Anti-Defection Law | X.13
4. 	What is the subject of the 91st Constitutional Amendment Act, 2003?
(a) 	Right to Information 	(b) Limiting the size of Council of Ministers
(c) 	Right to Education 	(d) Elimination of Corruption at all Levels
5. 	Who/Which of the following decides the question of disqualification of a member of the Parlia-
ment, arising on the ground of defection?
(a) 	President of India 	(b) Supreme Court
(c) 	Presiding Officer of the House 	(d) Election Commission
6. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The anti-defection law is intended to strengthen the fabric of Indian Parliamentary democracy.
2. 	The anti-defection law was enacted during the Prime Ministership of P.V. Narasimha Rao.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
7. 	Statement I: 	The provision of the Tenth Schedule pertaining to exemption from disqualification
in case of split by one-third members of legislature party has been deleted by the
91st Amendment.
Statement II: The Dinesh Goswami Committee, the Law Commission of India and the
Constitutional Review Commission recommended ommission of the provision
of the Tenth Schedule pertaining to exemption from disqualification in case of
splits.
Codes:
(a) 	Both the statements are individually true and Statement II is the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(b) 	Both the statements are individually true but Statement II is not the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(c) 	Statement I is true but Statement II is false.
(d) 	Statement I is false but Statement II is true.
1. 	(a) 	2. 	(b) 	3. 	(d) 	4. 	(b) 	5. 	(c)
6. 	(a) 	7. 	(a)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 353] ---
X.14 | Objective Indian Polity
Pressure Groups
Sixty Eight
1. 	Which one of the following statements is not an explanation of the general characteristics of a
pressure group?
(a) 	A major objective of a pressure group is to acquire, consolidate and extend political power.
(b) 	A pressure group aims at projecting and fulfilling specific interests.
(c) 	A pressure group seeks to influence decision-makers in a manner favourable to its specific
interests.
(d) 	A pressure group is generally too limited in its organisation and goals to be mistaken for a
bonafide political party.
2. 	To which one of the following major political parties is the Centre of Indian Trade Unions (CITU)
attached?
(a) 	Indian National Congress
(b) 	Communist Party of India (Marxist)
(c) 	Communist Party of India
(d) 	Bharatiya Janata Party
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 354] ---
Pressure Groups | X.15
3. 	Which one of the following is the primary purpose of a pressure group?
(a) 	To criticise the government
(b) 	To contest the elections
(c) 	To formulate policy
(d) 	To bring pressure on government to influence policy decision
4. 	Which one of the following was the first country-wide pressure group of the organised Indian
working class?
(a) 	All India Trade Union Congress
(b) 	Indian National Trade Union Congress
(c) 	United Trade Union Congress
(d) 	Hind Mazdoor Sabha
5. 	A pressure group is distinct from a political party in as much as it does not directly:
(a) 	Contest elections 	(b) Finance a candidate
(c) 	Propagate a policy 	(d) Resort to mobilisation of opinion
6. 	Assertion (A): Pressure groups involve themselves in politics and policy-making process in India
through direct and indirect means.
Reason (R): 	They aspire to come to power to achieve their goals.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A.
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A.
(c) 	A is true but R is false.
(d) 	A is false but R is true.
7. 	Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Parties) 	(Trade Unions)
A. 	Indian National Congress 	1. 	C.I.T.U.
B. 	Bhartaiya Janata Party 	2. 	A.I.T.U.C.
C. 	Communist Party of India 	3. 	B.M.S.
D. 	Communist Party of India (Marxist) 	4. 	I.N.T.U.C.
5. 	B.K.S.
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	3 	4 	2 	1
(b) 	4 	3 	1 	5
(c) 	3 	4 	1 	5
(d) 	4 	3 	2 	1
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 355] ---
X.16 | Objective Indian Polity
1. 	(a) 	2. 	(b) 	3. 	(d) 	4. 	(a) 	5. 	(a)
6. 	(c) 	7. 	(d)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 356] ---
National Integration | X.17
National Integration
Sixty Nine
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The National Integration Council is a recommendatory body.
2. 	The National Integration Council is a constitutional body.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Communalism in Indian context means:
(a) 	Serving the community in a befitting manner
(b) 	Using communal identity for political gains
(c) 	A group of people bound by ethnic feelings
(d) 	Creating friendly relations with the other communities
3. 	In which of the following years, was the National Integration Council constituted first?
(a) 	1950 	(b) 1956
(c) 	1961 	(d) 1963
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 357] ---
X.18 | Objective Indian Polity
4. 	Assertion (A): Regionalism in Indian politics reflects the cultural diversity of the country.
Reason (R): 	Political leaders whip up the ethnic identities.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A.
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A.
(c) 	A is true but R is false.
(d) 	A is false but R is true.
5. 	Who of the following is the Chairman of the National Integration Council?
(a) 	President of India 	(b) Chief Justice of India
(c) 	Speaker of the Lok Sabha 	(d) Prime Minister of India
6. 	The National Foundation for Communal Harmony is under the administrative control of:
(a) 	Minority Affairs Ministry 	(b) Home Affairs Ministry
(c) 	Cabinet Secretariat 	(d) Prime Minister’s Office
7. 	Statement I: 	The states were reorganized on a large-scale in 1956 on the basis of the
recommendations made by the States Reorganisation Commission.
Statement II: The creation of the first linguistic state of Andhra in 1953 led to the country-wide
demand for the reorganization of states on the basis of language.
Codes:
(a) 	Both the statements are individually true and Statement II is the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(b) 	Both the statements are individually true but Statement II is not the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(c) 	Statement I is true but Statement II is false.
(d) 	Statement I is false but Statement II is true.
1. 	(a) 	2. 	(b) 	3. 	(c) 	4. 	(b) 	5. 	(d)
6. 	(b) 	7. 	(a)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 358] ---
Foreign Policy | X.19
Foreign Policy
Seventy
1. 	Which of the following are the principles of the Panchsheel?
1. 	Peaceful co-existence 	2. Mutual protection of the environment
3. 	Mutual protection of indigenous population 4. Mutual non-aggression
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	2 and 3 	(b) 1 and 2
(c) 	1, 2 and 4 	(d) 1 and 4
2. 	Which one of the following does not come under the concept of Non-alignment?
(a) 	Foreign aid from all available sources
(b) 	Non-involvement in military alliances formulated in the context of Cold War
(c) 	Faith in isolationism
(d) 	A demand for a better deal from the North Countries or South Countries
3. 	Despite being a Republican State, India is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations whose
head is the British Monarch. This is because:
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 359] ---
X.20 | Objective Indian Polity
(a) 	This membership does not affect the sovereign nature of the Indian Republic.
(b) 	This membership only shows that the British ruled over India.
(c) 	Members of the association are sovereign and independent.
(d) 	It is a symbol of the unity among the members of the association.
4. 	Where was the First Asian Relations Conference held?
(a) 	Manila 	(b) Tokyo
(c) 	New Delhi 	(d) Colombo
5. 	In which of the following years, was the Indo-China Treaty on Tibet signed?
(a) 	1950 	(b) 1954
(c) 	1957 	(d) 1962
6. 	Which of the following Commonwealth Summit was hosted by India?
(a) 	15th Summit 	(b) 18th Summit
(c) 	24th Summit 	(d) 27th Summit
7. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	India’s “Look East” policy lays emphasis on improving cooperation with India’s neighbouring
south-east and east Asian countries.
2. 	The “Look East” policy of India was initiated by the Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
8. 	In which of the following years, India adopted its nuclear doctrine?
(a) 	2000 	(b) 2002
(c) 	2003 	(d) 2004
9. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Gujral Doctrine of India is formulated on India’s accommodating approach towards its
smaller neighbours on the basis of the principle of non-reciprocity.
2. 	The Gujral Doctrine of India was initiated in 1994.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
1. 	(d) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(a) 	4. 	(c) 	5. 	(b)
6. 	(c) 	7. 	(a) 	8. 	(c) 	9. 	(a)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 360] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 361] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 362] ---
Working of the
Constitution
Eleven
Seventy One 	National Commission to Review
the Working of the Constitution
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 363] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 364] ---
National Commission to
Review the Working of the
Constitution
Seventy One
1. 	Which of the following in respect of the enlargement of Fundamental Rights were recommended
by the “National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution” constituted by the
Government of India in the year 2000?
1. 	Every person has a right to respect for his private and family life.
2. 	Every person has a right to leave the territory of India and every citizen shall have the right to
return to India.
3. 	Every person who has been illegally deprived of his right to life or liberty shall have an
enforceable right to compensation.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 only 	(b) 2 and 3 only
(c) 	1 and 3 only 	(d) 1, 2 and 3
2. 	Which of the following were the main areas of concern for the “National Commission to Review
the Working of the Constitution” constituted by the Government of India in the year 2000?
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 365] ---
XI.6 | Objective Indian Polity
1. 	Electoral Reforms
2. 	Union-State Relations
3. 	Enlargement of Fundamental Rights
4. 	Administrative System and Standards in Public Life
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	1 and 3 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
3. 	Who among the following was not a member of the “National Commission to Review the Work-
ing of the Constitution” constituted by the Government of India in the year 2000?
(a) 	Soli J. Sorabjee 	(b) C.R. Irani
(c) 	P.A. Sangma 	(d) Somnath Chatterjee
4. 	Which of the following was/were suggested by the National Commission to Review the Working
of the Constitution (2002)?
1. 	The Governor should be appointed only after consultation with the Chief Minister of the
concerned State.
2. 	A person with fair knowledge of Constitution and Indian polity should be preferred as
Governor.
3. 	The Governor should not be allowed to dismiss the ministry, so long as it enjoys the confidence
of the Assembly.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 1 and 2 only
(c) 	2 and 3 only 	(d) 1 and 3 only
5. 	Who among the following was the Chairman of the “National Commission to Review the Work-
ing of the Constitution” constituted by the Government of India in the year 2000?
(a) 	A.M. Ahmadi 	(b) A.S. Anand
(c) 	M.N. Venkatachalaiah 	(d) J.S. Verma
1. 	(d) 	2. 	(d) 	3. 	(d) 	4. 	(d) 	5. 	(c)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 366] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 367] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 368] ---
Appendices
Twelve
Appendix I 	Articles of the Constitution (1-395)
Appendix II 	Subjects of Union, State and Concurrent Lists
Appendix III 	Table of Precedence
Appendix IV 	Oath by the Constitutional and other Authorities
Appendix V 	Definitions Under the Constitution
Appendix VI 	Constitutional Amendments
Appendix VII 	Allied Amending Acts
Appendix VIII 	Model Code of Conduct Relating to Elections
Appendix IX 	Flag Code of India
Appendix X 	Presidents, Vice-Presidents, Prime Ministers, etc.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 369] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam