
--- [PDF PAGE 182] ---
Governor
Twenty Six
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Parliament by law may appoint the Governor of a state as the Administrator of an
adjoining Union territory.
2. 	If a Governor of a State is appointed to act as an Administrator of an adjoining Union
territory, he shall exercise his functions as such Administrator independently of his Council
of Ministers.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	1 only 	(b) 2 only
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	As regards legislative powers, the Governor of a State is not a part of the State Legislature.
2. 	The Governor of a State has no emergency powers to meet the situation arising from external
aggression.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 183] ---
IV.6 | Objective Indian Polity
3. 	Consider the following statements with respect to the powers of the Governor of a State:
1. 	The governor can summon, prorogue and dissolve the State Assembly.
2. 	The Governor can adjourn the sittings of the State Assembly.
3. 	The Governor addresses the first session of the Legislative Assembly after elections.
4. 	The Governor causes to lay the annual budget in the State Assembly.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 1, 3 and 4
(c) 	2 and 3 	(d) 2 and 4
4. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	There is a bar to the selection of a Governor of a State from amongst the members of the
Legislature of the State.
2. 	The original plan in the Draft Constitution of India was to have an elected Governor but in
the Constituent Assembly it was replaced by the method of appointment by the President of
India.
3. 	The method of appointment of a Governor of a State by the President of India is repugnant
to the prevailing practice in the federal systems of the United States of America and Australia.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 	1, 2 and 3
(b) 	1 and 2 only
(c) 	2 and 3 only
(d) 	1 and 3 only
5. 	Which one of the following statements is not correct?
(a) 	The Governor can issue ordinances when the Legislative Assembly is not in session or only
when two Houses are not in session.
(b) 	The Governor can at his discretion issue the ordinances whether the Assembly is in session
or not.
(c) 	The Governor must be satisfied that such circumstances exist which render it necessary for
him to take immediate action.
(d) 	The Governor’s ordinance shall have the same force and effect as an Act of the Legislature.
6. 	When a Bill passed by the State Legislature attempts to take away the powers of the High Court
and is presented before the Governor for his assent, he:
(a) 	May give his assent
(b) 	May withhold his assent
(c) 	Is bound to return the Bill for reconsideration
(d) 	Is bound to reserve the Bill for the consideration of the President
7. 	Which of the following are functions to which the scope of the discretionary powers of the Gov-
ernor is limited?
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 184] ---
Governor | IV.7
1. 	The appointment of the Chief Minister
2. 	The dismissal of the Ministry
3. 	The dissolution of the Legislative Assembly
4. 	Assent to Bills
Choose the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 1, 2, 3 and 4
(c) 	1, 3 and 4 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
8. 	Assertion (A): According to the Constitution of India, the same person cannot function as the
Governor of two or more States at the same time.
Reason (R): 	Article 153 of the Constitution states that there shall be a Governor for each
State.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
9. 	The de-jure head of a State Government is the:
(a) 	Chief Minister of the State 	(b) Law Minister of the State
(c) 	Home Minister of the State 	(d) Governor of the State
10. Consider the following statements:
The Governor of a State has the power to appoint:
1. 	Judges of the High Court
2. 	Members of the State Public Service Commission
3. 	Members of the State Finance Commission
4. 	The Accountant General
Which of these statements are correct?
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	1, 3 and 4 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
11. On receipt of the report from the Governor of a State that the Government of the State cannot
be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution, the President of India under
Article 356:
(a) 	Has to proclaim President’s Rule in the State
(b) 	Has to dismiss the State Government and dissolve the Legislative Assembly
(c) 	Has to dismiss the Government but keep that Legislative Assembly in a state of suspended
animation
(d) 	May refuse to impose President’s Rule in the State
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 185] ---
IV.8 | Objective Indian Polity
12. When can the Governor of a State issue an ordinance?
(a) 	When the Union Government asks him to do so
(b) 	Whenever there is a law and order problem in the State
(c) 	Whenever the State Legislature is not in session and the Governor is satisfied that immediate
action is needed
(d) 	Whenever the Judiciary advises him to do so
13. Consider the following statements:
Under Article 200 of the Constitution of India, the Governor may:
1. 	Withhold his assent to a Bill passed by the State Legislature.
2. 	Reserve the Bill passed by the State Legislature for the consideration of the President.
3. 	Return a Bill, other than a Money Bill, for reconsideration of the legislature.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	1 and 3 	(d) 1, 2 and 3
14. The correct constitutional position regarding the Governor is that the:
(a) 	Governor acts on the advice of the Prime Minister
(b) 	Governor acts on the advice of the President of India
(c) 	Governor acts on the advice of the Chief Minister of the State
(d) 	Governor acts on the advice of the Council of Ministers of the State
15. Assertion (A): The Draft Constitution provided for the direct election of the Governor.
Reason (R): 	The Constituent Assembly opted for the present system of appointment of the
Governor by the President.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
16. Consider the following statements:
The Governor of a State:
1. 	Is vested with executive power under the Constitution of India
2. 	Is needed because of the federal structure of government
3. 	Was to be elected according to the original Draft Constitution of India
4. 	Is chosen only from among the categories laid down in the Constitution of India
Which of these statements are correct?
(a) 	1 and 4 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	1, 2 and 3 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 186] ---
Governor | IV.9
17. In the performance of his duties and in the exercise of his powers, the Governor
(a) 	Is answerable in a court of law 	(b) Is not answerable in a court of law
(c) 	Can be impeached in the Vidhan Sabha 	(d) Is answerable to the Vidhan Sabha
18. Under Article 213, the Governor of a State is empowered to:
(a) 	Exercise discretionary powers
(b) 	Promulgate ordinances during the recess of the Legislature
(c) 	Appoint a Judge of the State High Court
(d) 	Exercise his emergency powers
19. On which of the following issues can a Governor make recommendation to the President?
1. 	Dismissal of the State Council of Ministers
2. 	Removal of the Judges of the High Court
3. 	Dissolution of the State Legislative Assembly
4. 	Declaration of the breakdown of the Constitutional Machinery in the State
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 2, 3 and 4
(c) 	1, 3 and 4 	(d) 1, 2 and 4
20. Which one of the following statements is not correct?
(a) 	The Council of Ministers is collectively responsible to the Governor.
(b) 	Under Article 167 of the Constitution of India, the Chief Minister has to communicate to
the Governor all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the
affairs of the State and proposals for legislation.
(c) 	Once the Governor reserves a Bill for the consideration of the President, the subsequent
enactment of the Bill is in the hands of the President and the Governor shall have no further
part in its career.
(d) 	The executive power of the State is vested in the Governor and all executive actions of the
State have to be taken in the name of the Governor.
21. In which one of the following states, it is not constitutionally obligatory for the Governor to ap-
point a minister in-charge of tribal affairs?
(a) 	Bihar 	(b) Madhya Pradesh
(c) 	Odisha 	(d) Jharkhand
22. Consider the following matters:
1. 	Reservation of the State Bill for the consideration of the President
2. 	Delivery of Speech in the House of the Legislature
3. 	Recommendation to the President to impose the President’s Rule
Under Article 163 of the Constitution of India, the Governor is required to act in accordance
with the advice of the Council of Ministers; but in relation to which of the matters given above,
the said rule is not applicable?
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 187] ---
IV.10 | Objective Indian Polity
(a) 	1 and 3 	(b) 1, 2 and 3
(c) 	2 and 3 	(d) Only 2
23. Who of the following is not appointed by the Governor?
(a) 	State Council of Ministers
(b) 	State Advocate General
(c) 	State Director General of Police
(d) 	Members of State Public Service Commission
24. The Governor of a State may be removed from the office by the President:
(a) 	At the request of the Chief Minister
(b) 	On the advice of the Lok Ayukta
(c) 	On the advice of the Union Cabinet
(d) 	On the advice of the Attorney-General of India
25. Consider the following statements with respect to Governor of a State:
1. 	A Governor shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to hold office until his
successor enters upon his office.
2. 	No person shall be eligible for appointment as Governor unless he has completed the age of
thirty years.
3. 	The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by Ministers to the Governor
shall not be inquired into in any Court.
Which of the statement(s) given above is / are correct?
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 1 and 2
(c) 	1 and 3 	(d) Only 3
26. Assertion (A): Reservation of a State Bill for the assent of the President is a discretionary power
of the Governor.
Reason (R): 	The President of India can disallow a Bill passed by a State Legislature or return
it for reconsideration.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
27. Which one of the following is not correct in respect of the Governor’s Ordinance-making power?
(a) 	It is exercised only when the Legislature is not in session.
(b) 	It is a discretionary power which need not be exercised with the aid and advice of Ministers.
(c) 	The Governor himself is competent to withdraw the Ordinance at any time.
(d) 	The scope of the Ordinance-making power is limited to subjects in List II and List III of
Schedule VII.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 188] ---
Governor | IV.11
28. Under which Article of the Constitution of India, the State Governor can reserve a Bill for the
consideration of the President?
(a) 	Article 169 	(b) Article 200
(c) 	Article 201 	(d) Article 257
29. Rules for more convenient transaction of business of the State Government are made by:
(a) 	The Chief Secretary
(b) 	A Committee of Secretaries
(c) 	The Department of Home of the concerned State Government
(d) 	The Governor
30. Consider the following statements with regard to the powers enjoyed by the Governor of a State:
1. 	He addresses the Legislative Assembly of the State at the commencement of the first session
of each year.
2. 	He can send messages to the Legislative Assembly with respect to a Bill pending in the
Assembly at that time.
3. 	He can summon, prorogue and dissolve the Legislative Assembly of the State.
4. 	He can give assent to a Bill to curtail the powers of the State High Court.
Which of these are correct?
(a) 	1 and 4 	(b) 3 and 4
(c) 	1 and 2 	(d) 1, 2 and 3
31. Which one of the following Constitutional Amendments made it possible to appoint one person
to hold the office of the Governor in two or more states simultaneously?
(a) 	Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956
(b) 	Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976
(c) 	Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977
(d) 	Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978
32. Which one of the following statements is correct?
(a) 	The same person can be appointed as Governor of three states.
(b) 	A Governor can be appointed only in consultation with the Chief Minister of the State
concerned.
(c) 	A Governor has no power to entrust any of the functions of the state to Government of
India even with the latter’s consent.
(d) 	Only a person who has completed 30 years of age can be appointed as Governor of a state.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 189] ---
IV.12 | Objective Indian Polity
1. 	(b) 	2. 	(b) 	3. 	(b) 	4. 	(c) 	5. 	(b)
6. 	(d) 	7. 	(a) 	8. 	(d) 	9. 	(d) 	10. 	(b)
11. 	(a) 	12. 	(c) 	13. 	(d) 	14. 	(d) 	15. 	(b)
16. 	(c) 	17. 	(b) 	18. 	(b) 	19. 	(c) 	20. 	(a)
21. 	(a) 	22. 	(a) 	23. 	(c) 	24. 	(c) 	25. 	(c)
26. 	(b) 	27. 	(b) 	28. 	(b) 	29. 	(d) 	30. 	(d)
31. 	(a) 	32. 	(a)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 190] ---
Chief Minister | IV.13
Chief Minister
Twenty Seven
1. 	Consider the following statements with regard to the Chief Minister of a State:
1. 	He is appointed by the Governor of the State.
2. 	He and his Council of Ministers are collectively responsible to the Governor.
3. 	He must communicate to the Governor all the decisions of Council of Ministers relating to the
administration of the State and proposals for legislation.
4. 	If the Governor of the State so requires, the Chief Minister shall submit for the consideration
of the Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a minister but
which has not been considered by the Council of Ministers.
Which of these is / are correct?
(a) 	1, 2, 3 and 4
(b) 	Only 4
(c) 	1, 3 and 4
(d) 	1 and 3
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 191] ---
IV.14 | Objective Indian Polity
2. 	Consider the following powers / functions:
1. 	Appointing ministers and allocating portfolios to them
2. 	Presiding over the meetings of the Cabinet
3. 	Resolving conflicts between ministers
4. 	Communicating with the Governor
The powers / functions of the Chief Minister of a State include:
(a) 	2, 3 and 4 	(b) 1 and 4
(c) 	1, 2 and 3 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
3. 	Which of the following are included in Article 167 of the Indian Constitution, defining the duties
of Chief Minister?
1. 	To communicate to the Governor of the State all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating
to the administration of the affairs of the State and proposals for legislation.
2. 	To take prior Governor’s sanction for the budget before submitting it in the State Legislative
Assembly.
3. 	To furnish the information called for by the Governor regarding administration of affairs of
the State.
4. 	If the Governor so requires, to submit for consideration of the Council of Ministers a matter
on which a Minister has taken a decision without submitting the same for consideration by the
Council beforehand.
Choose the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 1, 3 and 4
(c) 	2 and 4 	(d) 1 and 3
4. 	Which one of the following is constitutionally obligatory on the part of the Chief Minister of a
State?
(a) 	As the Governor is the head of the State, the Chief Minister has to take all major decisions
regarding administration only after prior approval by the Governor.
(b) 	The Chief Minister has to communicate to the Governor all decisions of the cabinet relating
to administration and proposals for legislation.
(c) 	As the ministers are appointed by the Governor, the Chief Minister has to go by Governor’s
discretion in the allocation of business among the ministers.
(d) 	The Chief Minister, if he happens to be the leader of a party not having the required majority,
should prove his majority strength in the State Legislative Assembly within the period
stipulated by the Governor.
5. 	Which one of the following is correct in terms of the Constitution of India?
(a) 	The Chief Minister decides the allocation of portfolios among the Ministers.
(b) 	When the Chief Minister resigns, the Council of Ministers gets dissolved.
(c) 	All the principal policy announcements of the Government are made by the Chief Minister.
(d) 	It shall be the duty of Chief Minister to communicate to the Governor all decisions of the
Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the State.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 192] ---
Chief Minister | IV.15
6. 	Assertion (A): In the matters of appointment and dismissal of Ministers, the Chief Minister’s
word is final.
Reason (R): 	Governor appoints the leader of the majority party as the Chief Minister and on
his advice appoints other ministers.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
7. 	When there is no majority party in the State Legislative Assembly, the principal consideration
governing the choice of the Chief Minister by the Governor of the State is the:
(a) 	Ability of the person who is most likely to command a stable majority in the House
(b) 	Largest political party in the Legislative Assembly
(c) 	The combination of several parties as a unit
(d) 	The loyalty and support of the party members to their respective party programmes and
policies
8. 	The Constitution of India lays down that proposals for legislation are to be communicated to the
Governor by the:
(a) 	Chief Minister 	(b) Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
(c) 	Minister for Law 	(d) Minister for Home Affairs
9. 	Assertion (A): The Chief Minister of a State is the head of the Council of Ministers of that
State.
Reason (R): 	The Chief Minister is responsible to the State Legislative Assembly and enjoys the
support of a majority in the House.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
10. Consider the following statements:
The Chief Minister as the head of the State Council of Ministers:
1. 	Has a free hand in the distribution of portfolios
2. 	Can reshuffle the Ministers and ask any Minister to resign
3. 	Is bound by the advice of the Ministers
4. 	Advises the Ministers in day-to-day administration of departments
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	1, 2 and 4 	(d) 3 and 4
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 193] ---
IV.16 | Objective Indian Polity
11. Statement I: 	The Chief Minister of a State can exercise control over other branches of
Government through a coterie of advisors.
Statement II: The Chief Minister and his Cabinet function on the basis of collective responsibility.
Codes:
(a) 	Both the statements are individually true and Statement II is the correct explanation of
Statement I
(b) 	Both the statements are individually true but Statement II is not the correct explanation of
Statement I
(c) 	Statement I is true but Statement II is false
(d) 	Statement I is false but Statement II is true
12. Consider the following statements with respect to duties of the Chief Minister of a State accord-
ing to the Constitution of India:
1. 	To make rules for the more convenient transaction of business of the State Government, and
for the allocation among Ministers of the said business.
2. 	If the Governor of the State so requires, to submit for consideration of the Council of
Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a Minister but which has not been
considered by the Council.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
13. In which of the following bodies, does the Chief Minister of a State hold membership?
1. 	National Integration Council
2. 	National Development Council
3. 	Inter-State Council
4. 	Zonal Council
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 3 and 4 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
1. 	(c) 	2. 	(a) 	3. 	(b) 	4. 	(b) 	5. 	(d)
6. 	(a) 	7. 	(a) 	8. 	(a) 	9. 	(a) 	10. 	(a)
11. 	(d) 	12. 	(b) 	13. 	(c)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 194] ---
State Council of Ministers | IV.17
State Council of Ministers
Twenty Eight
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Governor cannot function without the State Council of Ministers.
2. 	A person who is not a member of the State Legislature cannot be appointed as a minister.
3. 	The State Council of Ministers can function for sometime even after death or resignation of
the Chief Minister.
4. 	In the absence of the Chief Minister, only the Home Minister can preside over emergency
meetings of the State Council of Ministers.
Which of these is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) 3 and 4
(c) 	1, 2 and 4 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
2. 	There is a constitutional requirement to have a Minister in-charge of Tribal Welfare for the States of:
(a) 	Assam, Nagaland and Manipur
(b) 	Himachal Pradesh, Haryana and Rajasthan
(c) 	Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand
(d) 	Manipur, Tripura and Meghalaya
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 195] ---
IV.18 | Objective Indian Polity
3. 	Some state governments have, besides Cabinet Ministers and Ministers of State, Parliamentary
Secretaries also. These Parliamentary Secretaries who are also members of the State Legislature
are appointed by:
(a) 	The Chief Minister 	(b) The Governor
(c) 	The Chief Whip of the ruling party 	(d) The Speaker
4. 	The salaries and allowances of the Council of Ministers of the State Government are paid from
the:
(a) 	Reserve Bank of India 	(b) Treasury of the State Government
(c) 	Contingency Fund of the State 	(d) Consolidated Fund of the state
5. 	Which of the Articles of the Constitution of India are relevant to analyse the constitutional provi-
sions that deal with the relationship of the Governor with the State Council of Ministers?
(a) 	Articles 161, 165 and 166 	(b) Articles 163, 164 and 167
(c) 	Articles 162, 163 and 168 	(d) Articles 164, 165 and 169
6. 	Assertion (A): Collective responsibility of the Cabinet signifies unity and coordination among
members of the State Council of Ministers.
Reason (R): 	It is the prerogative of the Chief Minister to select or drop a member of the
Cabinet.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
7. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	All decisions of the State Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the State must
be communicated to the Governor.
2. 	The Governor can call for information relating to proposals for legislation.
3. 	The Governor can direct that any matter on which decision has been taken by a Minister
should be placed before the State Council of Ministers.
4. 	The Governor has the right to address and send messages to the State Council of Ministers to
elicit specific information.
Which of these is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) 3 and 4
(c) 	1, 2 and 3 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
8. 	In which of the following provisions of the Constitution of India is the principle of collective
responsibility of the State Council of Ministers enshrined?
(a) 	Article 164 	(b) Article 162
(c) 	Article 163 	(d) Article 167
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 196] ---
State Council of Ministers | IV.19
9. 	The ministers in the State could be prosecuted only with the approval of the Governor because
they:
(a) 	Are the heads of the ministries
(b) 	Are representatives of the people
(c) 	Enjoy certain immunities under the provisions of the Constitution
(d) 	Exercise executive powers on behalf of the Governor
10. The ministers in the Council of Ministers at the state level are appointed by:
(a) 	President of the party
(b) 	Governor
(c) 	Chief Minister
(d) 	Prime Minister
11. Assertion (A): The strength of the State Council of Ministers has not been specified in the
Constitution of India.
Reason (R): 	A number of pressures operate in the determination of the strength of the
Ministry.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
12. Which of the following are not mentioned in the Constitution of India?
1. 	Council of Ministers headed by a Chief Minister
2. 	Collective Responsibility of the State Council of Ministers
3. 	Resignation of State Ministers
4. 	Office of the Deputy Chief Minister
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	3 and 4 	(d) 1 and 3
13. According to the Constitution of India, if the Governor so requires, it shall be the duty of the
Chief Minister to submit for the consideration of the State Council of Ministers any matter on
which a decision has been taken by a Minister, but which has not been considered by the Council.
This ensures:
(a) 	Collective responsibility
(b) 	The status of the Chief Minister as the first among the equals
(c) 	The power of the Governor to nullify the decision of the Minister
(d) 	The inherent power of the Minister to take a decision independent of the State Council of
Ministers
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 197] ---
IV.20 | Objective Indian Polity
14. The accountability or responsibility of the Chief Minister and Cabinet to the State Legislative As-
sembly is
(a) 	Intermittent 	(b) Indirect
(c) 	At the time of elections 	(d) Direct, continuous and collective
15. According to Article 163 of the Constitution, which of the following statements relating to the
question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by Ministers to the Governor would be
correct?
(a) 	It shall not be inquired into in any court.
(b) 	It can be inquired into in the Supreme Court.
(c) 	It can be inquired into in all the courts.
(d) 	It cannot be inquired into in the High Court.
16. How are the salaries and allowances of the State Ministers determined?
(a) 	By the Home Department 	(b) By the State Legislature
(c) 	By the Finance Department 	(d) By the Law Department
1. 	(a) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(b) 	4. 	(d) 	5. 	(b)
6. 	(b) 	7. 	(c) 	8. 	(a) 	9. 	(c) 	10. 	(b)
11. 	(a) 	12. 	(c) 	13. 	(a) 	14. 	(d) 	15. 	(a)
16. 	(b)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 198] ---
State Legislature | IV.21
State Legislature
Twenty Nine
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	A bill pending in the Legislature of a State shall not lapse by reason of the prorogation of the
House or Houses thereof.
2. 	A bill pending in the Legislative Council of a State which has not been passed by the Legislative
Assembly shall not lapse on dissolution of the Assembly.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	Parliament may by law provide for the abolition of the Legislative Council of a State having
such a council or for the creation of such a council in a state having no such council.
2. 	The total number of members in the Legislative Council of a State having such a council shall
not exceed one half of the total number of members in the Legislative Assembly of that State.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 199] ---
IV.22 | Objective Indian Polity
3. 	The Upper Chamber of the State Legislature, besides other members, consists of:
(a) 	1/12 elected by teachers’ electorate; 1/3 elected by municipalities; 1/12 elected by registered
graduates
(b) 	1/12 elected by registered graduates; 1/12 elected by women; 1/3 elected by trade unions and
co-operative institutions
(c) 	1/12 elected by women; 1/12 elected by municipalities and other local bodies; 1/3 elected by
teachers’ electorate
(d) 	1/3 directly elected by the people; 1/12 elected by registered graduates; 1/12 elected by co-
operative banks, women’s organisations and other co-operative bodies
4. 	The quorum to hold a meeting of a House of the State Legislature shall be:
(a) 	Thirty members or one-tenth of total membership whichever is less
(b) 	One-half of the total membership of the House
(c) 	One-tenth of the total membership of the House
(d) 	Ten members or one-tenth of total membership whichever is more
5. 	Assertion (A): A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure
from the consolidated fund of a State must have been recommended by the
Governor to a House of the Legislature of the State for consideration of the Bill.
Reason (R): 	Such a bill cannot be passed by the House without the recommendation of the
Governor for consideration of the Bill.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
6. 	Consider the following statements:
A Bill is reserved by the Governor of a State for the consideration of the President. The President
may
1. 	Give his assent to the Bill
2. 	Withhold his assent to the Bill
3. 	Veto the Bill
4. 	Direct the Governor of the State to return it to the House for reconsideration
Which of these are correct?
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 3 and 4
(c) 	1, 2 and 4 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
7. 	Which one of the following states does not have Vidhan Parishad?
(a) 	Bihar 	(b) Maharashtra
(c) 	Rajasthan 	(d) Uttar Pradesh
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 200] ---
State Legislature | IV.23
8. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	No discussion can take place in the Legislature of a State with respect to the conduct of any
Judge of the Supreme Court as per the provisions of Constitution of India.
2. 	There is no restriction on the discussion to take place in the Legislature of a State with respect
to the conduct of any Judge of the State’s High Court as per provisions of the Constitution
of India.
3. 	Courts cannot enquire into any proceedings of the Legislatures as per the provisions of the
Constitution of India.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	1 and 3 	(d) 1, 2 and 3
9. 	The Legislative Assembly of a State can pass a resolution to abolish or create a Legislative Council
in the State by a:
(a) 	Majority of not less than 2/3 of the members of the Legislative Assembly present and voting.
(b) 	Majority of not less than 1/3 of the members of the Legislative Assembly present and voting
(c) 	Majority of the total membership of the Legislative Assembly and by a majority of not less
than 2/3 of the members present and voting
(d) 	Simple majority of the members of the State Legislative Assembly
10. Assertion (A): Governor can withhold a non-Money Bill passed by the State Legislature.
Reason (R): 	Governors are empowered by the Article 200 of the Constitution of India to do
so.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
11. What is the maximum permissible strength of the Legislative Assembly (Vidhan Sabha) of any
State?
(a) 	400 members 	(b) 425 members
(c) 	500 members 	(d) 545 members
12. Consider the following statements:
1. 	Reservation of a State Bill for the assent of the President is a discretionary power of the
Governor of a State.
2. 	President of India is not empowered to keep a bill of the State Legislature pending for an
indefinite period of time, without expressing his mind.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 201] ---
IV.24 | Objective Indian Polity
13. What is the time-limit within which a non-money Bill has to be sent to the State Legislature by the
Governor for reconsideration?
(a) 	14 days
(b) 	One month
(c) 	Three months
(d) 	No time limit specified
14. Which one of the following is not correct with respect to the powers of the Governor regarding
a Bill passed by the State Legislature?
(a) 	He may give his assent to the Bill
(b) 	He may withhold the Bill
(c) 	He may reserve the Bill for the consideration of the President
(d) 	He shall have no alternative but to give his assent to the Bill
1. 	(c) 	2. 	(a) 	3. 	(a) 	4. 	(d) 	5. 	(a)
6. 	(c) 	7. 	(c) 	8. 	(c) 	9. 	(c) 	10. 	(a)
11. 	(c) 	12. 	(a) 	13. 	(d) 	14. 	(d)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 202] ---
High Court | IV.25
High Court
Thirty
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The maximum number of Judges in a High Court are specified in the Constitution of India.
2. 	Every High Court has a power of superintendence over all courts and tribunals (except military
tribunals) provided they are subject to appellate jurisdiction of the High Court.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Consider the following statements:
A high court has jurisdiction to:
1. 	Punish for its contempt
2. 	Tender advice on a legal question referred to it by the President of India
3. 	Tender advice on a legal question referred to it by the Governor of the State
4. 	Issue certain writs for enforcement of Fundamental Rights or for other purposes
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 203] ---
IV.26 | Objective Indian Polity
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 	1 and 4 	(b) 1 and 2
(c) 	1, 2 and 3 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
3. 	The transfer of Judges from one High Court to another High Court may be made by the:
(a) 	President of India in consultation with the Chief Justice of that High Court.
(b) 	Chief Justice of the concerned High Court.
(c) 	Governor of the concerned State in consultation with the Chief Justice of India.
(d) 	President of India after consultation with the Chief Justice of India.
4. 	A retired judge of a High Court cannot:
(a) 	Practise in the Supreme Court
(b) 	Practise in any High Court in India
(c) 	Practise in the High Court from where he
(d) 	Practise in any court in India has retired
5. 	The writ jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of India under Article 32 of the Constitution of India
is not wider than that of the writ jurisdiction of the High Courts under Article 226 because the
High Courts may exercise this power in relation to:
(a) 	Civil and criminal matters 	(b) Fundamental and other legal rights
(c) 	Fundamental rights and matters in appeals 	(d) Fundamental rights and stay matters
6. 	Who among the following extends the jurisdiction of a High Court to, or excludes from, any
Union territory?
(a) 	Parliament by law
(b) 	The President of India
(c) 	The Chief Justice of India
(d) 	Legislature of the State in which the High Court is situated
7. 	The nature of ‘consultation’ with the Chief Justice of India in matters of appointment of a judge
to a High Court is correctly described as:
(a) 	Inspection of the file by the Chief Justice
(b) 	Concurrence of the Chief Justice
(c) 	Conformity with the opinion of the Chief Justice
(d) 	Formal reference to the Chief Justice without any obligation to carry out his wishes.
8. 	Assertion (A): A Habeas Corpus writ petition dismissed by the Supreme Court can be admitted
by the High Court under Art. 226 of the Constitution.
Reason (R): 	In exercising writ jurisdiction, the powers of the Supreme Court and High Court
are concurrent.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 204] ---
High Court | IV.27
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
9. 	Which one of the following statements is not correct?
(a) 	The Supreme Court can over-rule itself.
(b) 	A High Court can over-rule itself.
(c) 	Judgements of the Supreme Court bind the lower courts.
(d) 	Judgements of a High Court do not bind the lower courts of the State.
10. The High Court having the jurisdiction in judicial matters relating to the largest number of States
/ Union Territories is:
(a) 	Calcutta High Court 	(b) Kerala High Court
(c) 	Bombay High Court 	(d) Guwahati High Court
11. A Judge of a High Court can be removed from office during his tenure by:
(a) 	The Governor, if the State Legislature passes a resolution to this effect by two-thirds majority
(b) 	The President, on the basis of a resolution passed by the Parliament by two-thirds majority
(c) 	The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, on the recommendation of the Parliament
(d) 	The Chief Justice of the High Court, on the recommendation of the State Legislature
12. The power of judicial review means:
(a) 	The power of the courts to define and interpret constitution
(b) 	The power of the courts to declare null and void any legislative or executive act, which is
against the provisions of the Constitution
(c) 	The power of the judiciary to define and interpret laws
(d) 	The power of the courts to legislate when there is no statutory provision
13. Under the provisions of the Constitution of India, who is entitled to be consulted by the Presi-
dent of India in the matter of the appointments of the Judges of the High Courts?
(a) 	The Union Minister of Law and Justice 	(b) The Advocate General of the State
(c) 	The Attorney-General of India 	(d) The Governor
14. Under which Article(s) of the Constitution of India, is the power to issue writs for the enforce-
ment of the Fundamental Rights vested in the Supreme Court and the High Courts?
(a) 	Article 32 only 	(b) Article 226 only
(c) 	Article 32 and Article 226 both 	(d) Neither Article 32 nor Article 226
15. Which of the following are the main jurisdictions of the High Court of a State?
1. 	Original jurisdiction 	2. Appellate jurisdiction
3. 	Supervisory jurisdiction 	4. Advisory jurisdiction
Choose the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 2, 3 and 4
(c) 	1, 3 and 4 	(d) 1, 2 and 4
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 205] ---
IV.28 | Objective Indian Polity
1. 	(d) 	2. 	(a) 	3. 	(d) 	4. 	(c) 	5. 	(b)
6. 	(a) 	7. 	(c) 	8. 	(d) 	9. 	(d) 	10. 	(d)
11. 	(b) 	12. 	(b) 	13. 	(d) 	14. 	(c) 	15. 	(a)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 206] ---
Subordinate Courts | IV.29
Subordinate Courts
Thirty One
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The district judge exercises both judicial and administrative powers.
2. 	The sessions judge has no power to impose capital punishment.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Which of the following statements regarding subordinate courts are correct?
1. 	They function at district and lower levels.
2. 	The pattern and designation of subordinate courts in the States is not uniform.
3. 	Munsiff ’s courts have both civil and criminal jurisdiction.
4. 	The pattern of subordinate courts in metropolitan areas is the same as that in districts.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 1 and 3
(c) 	2 and 3 	(d) 3 and 4
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 207] ---
IV.30 | Objective Indian Polity
3. 	Who among the following appoints the District judge in a State?
(a) 	The Governor of the State 	(b) The President of India
(c) 	The Chief Minister of the State 	(d) Chief Justice of the High Court of the State
4. 	Who appoints the judicial officers of the subordinate judiciary other than the district judges?
(a) 	Union Public Service Commission
(b) 	State Public Service Commission
(c) 	Governor in accordance with the rules made by him in consultation with the High Court and
State Public Service Commission
(d) 	Governor in consultation with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such state
5. 	Which one of the following is not a qualification for a person to be appointed as district judge?
(a) 	He should not already be in the service of the Central or the State Government.
(b) 	He should have been an advocate or a pleader for seven years.
(c) 	He should have completed the 30 years of age.
(d) 	He should be recommended by the High Court for appointment.
1. 	(a) 	2. 	(a) 	3. 	(a) 	4. 	(c) 	5. 	(c)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 208] ---
Special Status of Jammu & Kashmir | IV.31
Special Status of
Jammu & Kashmir
Thirty Two
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	Part III of the Constitution of India dealing with Fundamental Rights is not applicable to the
state of Jammu & Kashmir.
2. 	Part IV of the Constitution of India dealing with Directive Principles is applicable to the state
of Jammu & Kashmir with some exceptions and conditions.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Constitution of J & K provides for Governor’s Rule in the state.
2. 	The Constitution of J & K declares Kashmiri as the official language of the state.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 209] ---
IV.32 | Objective Indian Polity
3. 	Which one of the following is correct?
(a) 	The High Court of J & K can issue writs only for the enforcement of the fundamental rights
and not for any other purpose.
(b) 	The High Court of J & K can issue writs not only for the enforcement of the fundamental
rights but also for any other purpose.
(c) 	The High Court of J & K can issue writs for any purpose except for enforcement of the
fundamental rights.
(d) 	The High Court of J & K can issue writs neither for the enforcement of the fundamental
rights nor for any other purpose.
4. 	The power of the President of India to declare that Article 370 (under which the state of J & K
enjoys a special status) shall cease to be operative, is subject to:
1. 	Public notification
2. 	Recommendation of Parliament
3. 	Advice of the Union Council of Ministers
4. 	Recommendation of the Constituent Assembly of J & K
Of these statements:
(a) 	1 and 3 are correct 	(b) 1 and 2 are correct
(c) 	2 and 4 are correct 	(d) 1 and 4 are correct
5. 	Originally, the head of the state in Jammu & Kashmir was designated as:
(a) 	Sadar-i-Azam 	(b) Sadar-i-Riyasat
(c) 	Wazir-i-Riyasat 	(d) Wazir-i-Azam
6. 	Which part of the Constitution of India grants a special status to the state of Jammu & Kashmir?
(a) 	Part XX 	(b) Part XXI
(c) 	Part XXII 	(d) Part XIX
7. 	According to the Constitution of India, which of the following statement(s) is/are not correct
with regard to Jammu & Kashmir?
1. 	Provisions of Article 368 cannot be extended to J & K unless it is extended by an order of the
President.
2. 	No alteration of the boundaries of the State without the consent of the Legislature of the
State of J & K.
3. 	The Union has power to make a proclamation of financial emergency with respect to the State
of J & K.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) 1 and 2
(c) 	3 only 	(d) 1 and 3
8. 	In India, there is a single constitution for the Union and the states with the exception of:
(a) 	Sikkim 	(b) Jammu & Kashmir
(c) 	Nagaland 	(d) Tamil Nadu
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 210] ---
Special Status ofJammu & Kashmir 	| IV.33
9. 	The Constitution of Jammu & Kashmir came into force on:
(a) 	January 26, 1950 	(b) January 26, 1952
(c) 	January 26, 1955 	(d) January 26, 1957
10. With respect to the state of Jammu & Kashmir, the Article 370 of the Constitution of India con-
tains:
(a) 	Special Provisions 	(b) Transitional Provisions
(c) 	Temporary Provisions 	(d) Emergency Provisions
11. Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Fifth Schedule of the Constitution of India (dealing with administration and control of
scheduled areas and scheduled tribes) is applicable to the state of Jammu & Kashmir.
2. 	The Sixth Schedule of the Constitution of India (dealing with administration of tribal areas)
is not applicable to the state of Jammu & Kashmir.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
1. 	(d) 	2. 	(a) 	3. 	(a) 	4. 	(d) 	5. 	(b)
6. 	(b) 	7. 	(c) 	8. 	(b) 	9. 	(d) 	10. 	(c)
11. 	(b)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 211] ---
IV.34 | Objective Indian Polity
Special Provisions for
Some States
Thirty Three
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Governor of Arunachal Pradesh shall have special responsibility for law and order in the
state.
2. 	The Arunachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly is to consist of not less than 40 members.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	The Acts of Parliament relating to the following matters would not apply to Nagaland unless the
State Legislative Assembly so decides:
1. 	Religious or social practices of the Nagas
2. 	Naga customary law and procedure
3. 	Administration of civil and criminal justice involving decisions according to Naga customary
law
4. 	Ownership and transfer of land and its resources
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 212] ---
Special Provisions for Some States 	| IV.35
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	2 and 3 	(b) 1 and 2
(c) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(d) 3 and 4
3. 	Who / which of the following can extend (with restrictions or modifications) to Sikkim any law
which is in force in a state of the Indian Union?
(a) 	Parliament of India 	(b) President of India
(c) 	Governor of Sikkim 	(d) Legislative Assembly of Sikkim
4. 	The temporary, transitional and special provisions mentioned in Part XXI of the Constitution of
India relate to which State(s)?
1. 	Jammu & Kashmir
2. 	Nagaland
3. 	Assam
4. 	Andhra Pradesh
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) 3 and 4
(c) 	1, 2 and 3 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
5. 	Under the provisions of Article 371-E of the Constitution of India, who/which of the follow-
ing is empowered to provide for the establishment of a Central University in the State of Andhra
Pradesh?
(a) 	President of India 	(b) Parliament of India
(c) 	Legislative Assembly of Andhra Pradesh 	(d) Governor of Andhra Pradesh
6. 	Who/which of the following is authorized to provide for the creation of a committee of the Ma-
nipur Legislative Assembly consisting of the members elected from the Hill areas of the State?
(a) 	Governor of Manipur 	(b) Chief Minister of Manipur
(c) 	Parliament of India 	(d) President of India
7. 	According to Article 371-A of the Constitution of India, the Governor of which one of the fol-
lowing States has special responsibility with respect to law and order in the State?
(a) 	Assam 	(b) Manipur
(c) 	Nagaland 	(d) Andhra Pradesh
8. 	Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(States) 	(Special Provisions Contained In)
A. 	Goa 	1. 	Article 371-D
B. 	Mizoram 	2. 	Article 371-B
C. 	Assam 	3. 	Article 371-I
D. 	Andhra Pradesh 	4. 	Article 371-H
5. 	Article 371-G
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 213] ---
IV.36 | Objective Indian Polity
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	3 	5 	2 	1
(b) 	5 	3 	4 	2
(c) 	5 	4 	3 	1
(d) 	3 	5 	1 	2
9. 	Article 371 of the Constitution of India provides for special provisions with respect to which of
the following states?
(a) 	Andhra Pradesh 	(b) Assam
(c) 	Nagaland 	(d) Maharashtra and Gujarat
10. Consider the following statements:
1. 	Article 371-E of the Constitution of India contains special provisions with respect to Sikkim.
2. 	The 38th Constitutional Amendment Act made Sikkim a full-fledged state of the Indian Union.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
1. 	(a) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(b) 	4. 	(d) 	5. 	(b)
6. 	(d) 	7. 	(c) 	8. 	(a) 	9. 	(d) 	10. 	(d)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 214] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 215] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 216] ---
Local
Government
Five
Thirty Four 	Panchayati Raj
Thirty Five 	Municipalities
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 217] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 218] ---
Panchayati Raj
Thirty Four
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	A Panchayat elected in the place of a dissolved one, does not enjoy the full period but remains
in office for the remaining period after the dissolution.
2. 	In Panchayats, seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and women but
not for Backward Classes of citizens.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	Courts have no jurisdiction to examine the validity of a law relating to delimitation of
constituencies or allotment of seats in respect of Panchayats.
2. 	An election to a Panchayat can be called in question only by an election petition, which should
be presented to such authority and in such manner as may be prescribed by the State Election
Commission.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 219] ---
V.6 | Objective Indian Polity
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
3. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Eleventh Schedule was inserted in the Constitution of India by the Constitution (Seventy
Third Amendment) Act, 1992.
2. 	The Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution of India corresponds to Article 243-W of the
Constitution of India.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
4. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	According to Article 243D, one-third of the seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes in every Panchayat.
2. 	Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved for the SCs and STs in every
Panchayat are reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes, or as the case may be,
the Scheduled Tribes.
3. 	Not less than one-third of the total number of offices of chairpersons in Panchayats at each
level are reserved for women.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 	1 and 2 only 	(b) 2 and 3 only
(c) 	1 and 3 only 	(d) 1, 2 and 3
5. 	On which of the following subjects, does the Finance Commission of a State constituted under
the Part IX of the Constitution of India make recommendations to the Governor?
1. 	Distribution between the State and the Panchayats of the net proceeds of the taxes by the
State.
2. 	Determination of the taxes which may be assigned to or appropriated by the Panchayats.
3. 	Grants-in-aid to the Panchayats from the Consolidated Fund of the State.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 1 and 2 only
(c) 	2 and 3 only 	(d) 1 and 3 only
6. 	Which one of the following is not correct?
(a) 	Part IX of the Constitution of India pertaining to the Panchayats provided for setting up of
a Finance Commission.
(b) 	Part IX of the Constitution of India pertaining to the Panchayats provided for vesting all
elections to the Panchayats in a State Election Commission.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 220] ---
Panchayati Raj | V.7
(c) 	Part IX of the Constitution of India pertaining to the Panchayats provided for reservation
of posts of chairpersons at the village level or any other level for the Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and women.
(d) 	Organisation of Village Panchayats is not included in the Directive Principles of State Policy.
7. 	73rd Amendment to the Constitution of India provides for:
(a) 	Two tiers of Panchayati Raj institutions at the village and district levels
(b) 	Two tiers of Panchayati Raj institutions at the village and block levels
(c) 	Two tiers of Panchayati Raj institutions at the block and district levels
(d) 	Three tiers of Panchayati Raj institutions at the village, block and district levels.
8. 	Who makes provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by the Panchayats and the
auditing of such accounts?
(a) 	Finance Commission of the concerned State(b) Legislature of the State
(c) 	Comptroller and Auditor General of India (d) District Collector
9. 	The State Election Commissioner can be removed:
(a) 	By the Governor of the State
(b) 	By the State Assembly
(c) 	Through an order issued by the Chief Minister
(d) 	Through a procedure similar to that for removal of the judge of a High Court
10. Consider the following statements:
In the post-73rd Amendment era, there has to be decentralisation of:
1. 	Decision-making powers 	2. System as a whole
3. 	Judicial powers 	4. Administrative powers
Which of these statements are correct?
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 1, 2 and 4
(c) 	2, 3 and 4 	(d) 1, 3 and 4
11. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Amendments / Committees) 	(Provisions)
A. 	73rd Constitutional Amendment 	1. 	Administrative Arrangement for Rural
Development
B. 	74th Constitutional Amendment 	2. 	State Finance Commission
C. 	G.V.K. Rao Committee 	3. 	Municipal Councils
D. 	L.M. Singhvi Committee 	4. 	Constitutional status to Panchayati Raj
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 221] ---
V.8 | Objective Indian Polity
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	2 	3 	4 	1
(b) 	2 	3 	1 	4
(c) 	3 	2 	1 	4
(d) 	3 	2 	4 	1
12. Which one of the following about Article 243 (G) is correct?
(a) 	Panchayats should be enabled by law to function as agents of the State Government.
(b) 	Panchayats should be enabled by law to function as institutions of self-government.
(c) 	Panchayats will act as the implementing agencies for centrally sponsored schemes.
(d) 	Gram Panchayats will be answerable to District Panchayats.
13. Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Chairperson of a Panchayat at district level is elected in such manner as the Legislature of
the State may provide.
2. 	Legislature of a State may provide for representation of members of the Legislative Assembly
of the State representing constituencies which comprise wholly or partly a Panchayat area at a
level other than the village level, in such Panchayat.
3. 	The Lok Sabha may provide for the representation of its members representing constituencies
which comprise wholly or partly a Panchayat area at a level other than the village level, in such
Panchayat.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Only 3 	(d) 2 and 3
14. 73rd Constitutional Amendment does not apply to which of the following states?
(a) 	Meghalaya 	(b) Goa
(c) 	Sikkim 	(d) Himachal Pradesh
15. Assertion (A): The Constitution of India now provides a mechanism for regular flow of funds
to Panchayati Raj institutions.
Reason (R): 	The Panchayati Raj institutions have been greatly handicapped in the performance
of their assigned duties by paucity of funds.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 222] ---
Panchayati Raj | V.9
16. Consider the following statements with respect to the 73rd Constitutional Amendment:
1. 	It envisages the Gram Sabha as the foundation of the Panchayati Raj System.
2. 	It provides that Panchayat bodies will have a duration of five years.
3. 	It stipulates that the Chairperson of a Panchayat shall be elected by and from amongst the
elected members thereof.
4. 	It has reserved 33 per cent of the seats to Other Backward Classes in Panchayati Raj Institutions.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(b) 1, 2 and 3
(c) 	2, 3 and 4 	(d) 1 and 2
17. Under which one of the following provisions is reservation for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes in every Panchayat made?
(a) 	Article 243 (Q) of the Constitution of India
(b) 	Article 243 (V) of the Constitution of India
(c) 	Article 243 (S) of the Constitution of India
(d) 	Article 243 (D) of the Constitution of India
18. Which of the following provisions can be made by law by a State Legislature?
1. 	Representation of the members of the House of People in Panchayats subject to fulfilling
certain conditions
2. 	Reservation of seats in any Panchayat in favour of backward class of citizens
3. 	Authorising a Panchayat to levy, collect and appropriate taxes
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 1 and 2, only
(c) 	2 and 3, only 	(d) 1 and 3, only
19. What is the minimum population below which Panchayats at the intermediate level are not consti-
tuted as per provision of the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act?
(a) 	20 lakhs
(b) 	25 lakhs
(c) 	30 lakhs
(d) 	35 lakhs
20. State Finance Commission is appointed by a State Government every five years to determine:
(a) 	Financial resources of the State for placing State’s requirement before the Union Government
(b) 	Development requirements of the State for formulating State Five Year Plan
(c) 	Budgetary requirements of various departments of the State Government
(d) 	Pattern of distribution of State’s tax revenue between the State Government and local bodies
(both rural and urban) and the pattern of grants-in-aid to local bodies
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 223] ---
V.10 | Objective Indian Polity
21. Which of the following is/are correct with respect to the 73rd Amendment to the Constitution of
India?
1. 	Constitutional status to Panchayats
2. 	Reservation of seats for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes
3. 	Providing permanent structures for district planning
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) Only 1
(c) 	2 and 3 	(d) Only 3
22. Under which of the following Articles of the Constitution of India, the State Legislatures delegate
powers and functions to the Panchayats?
(a) 	243 and 243 A 	(b) 243 A and 243 B
(c) 	243 G and 243 H 	(d) 243 D and 243 F
23. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(States) 	(Intermediate Panchayats)
A. 	Madhya Pradesh 	1. Panchayat Samiti
B. 	West Bengal 	2. Block Panchayat
C. 	Uttar Pradesh 	3. Taluka Panchayat
D. 	Gujarat 	4. Kshetra Panchayat
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	1 	2 	3 	4
(b) 	1 	2 	4 	3
(c) 	2 	1 	4 	3
(d) 	2 	1 	3 	4
24. In 1977, under whose chairmanship, the Panchayati Raj Committee was formed?
(a) 	Ashok Mehta 	(b) Sardar Swaran Singh
(c) 	Balwant Rai Mehta 	(d) Madhu Dandawate
25. Which of the following statements are correct?
Village Panchayats are responsible for:
1. 	Agricultural production
2. 	Rural industrial development
3. 	Maternity and child welfare
4. 	Higher vocational education
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 224] ---
Panchayati Raj | V.11
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 4 	(b) 1 and 3
(c) 	1, 2 and 3 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
26. Which one of the following States was the first to introduce the Panchayati Raj system?
(a) 	Tamil Nadu 	(b) West Bengal
(c) 	Rajasthan 	(d) Uttar Pradesh
27. Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act that provided for the establishment of Panchayats
also made which of the following provisions?
1. 	Addition of a new Schedule (XI) to the Constitution listing 29 subjects which are to be handled
by the Panchayats.
2. 	Addition of a new Schedule (XI) to the Constitution listing 18 subjects which are to be handled
by the Panchayats.
3. 	Bar on the courts to question the validity of laws relating to delimitation of constituencies.
4. 	Reservation of not less than one-third of the total number of seats in Panchayats for women
(excluding the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes).
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 3 and 4 	(b) 1 and 3
(c) 	2 and 4 	(d) 1 only
28. Which one of the following Articles of the Indian Constitution lays down that the State shall take
steps to organise Village Panchayats?
(a) 	Article 40 	(b) Article 26
(c) 	Article 39 	(d) Article 38
29. Assertion (A): Reservation of seats for women in Panchayati Raj bodies will pave the way for
their political empowerment.
Reason (R): 	Empowerment of women is essential for the achievement of democracy and
development.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
30. Consider the following features:
1. 	Panchayats have now been brought under the direct supervision of the Governor.
2. 	Finance Commission of the State now determines the distribution of taxes and duties between
the State and Panchayats.
3. 	Panchayats are now entitled to receive grants-in-aid directly from the Central Government.
4. 	1/3 of the seats in the Panchayats are now reserved for women.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 225] ---
V.12 | Objective Indian Polity
According to the 73 rd Amendment of the Constitution, which of these are correct features of
Panchayats?
(a) 	1 and 3 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	3 and 4 	(d) 2 and 4
31. The Panchayati Raj is included in the:
(a) 	Union List 	(b) State List
(c) 	Concurrent List 	(d) Residuary List
32. The 73rd Amendment Act emanates from the:
(a) 	Article 38 	(b) Article 40
(c) 	Article 44 	(d) Article 52
33. Who among the following are among those who comprise the Zila Parishad?
1. 	Chairmen / Presidents of the Panchayat Samities within the jurisdiction of the district
2. 	MPs, MLAs and MLCs whose constituencies are in the district
3. 	Representatives of co-operative societies, municipalities, notified area committees, etc.
4. 	Health care specialists
Choose the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 1, 2 and 3
(c) 	1, 2 and 4 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
34. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Features) 	(Related to)
A. 	Democratic Decentralisation 	1. 73rd Amendment
B. 	Nagar Panchayats 	2. 74th Amendment
C. 	Panchayati Raj Elections 	3. B.R. Mehta Committee
D. 	Two Tier System 	4. Ashok Mehta Committee
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	3 	1 	2 	4
(b) 	4 	1 	2 	3
(c) 	4 	2 	1 	3
(d) 	3 	2 	1 	4
35. Which of the following are within the mandate of the 73 rd Amendment to the Constitution of
India?
1. 	Disqualification provision for Panchayat membership
2. 	Setting up of a State Finance Commission
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 226] ---
Panchayati Raj | V.13
3. 	Empowering the State Election Commission to hold periodic local government elections
4. 	Constitution of a District Planning Committee
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 4 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	1 and 3 	(d) 1, 2 and 3
36. Under Article 243-D, which one of the following categories enjoys reservation for Panchayat
membership in proportion to their population?
(a) 	Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 	(b) Women
(c) 	Backward Classes 	(d) Physically handicapped persons
37. The members of a Panchayat Samiti are:
(a) 	Directly elected by the people
(b) 	Indirectly elected by the members of the Village Panchayat
(c) 	Nominated by the Block Development Officer
(d) 	Nominated by the president / chairman of the Panchayat Samiti
38. Which of the following is not a feature of Ashok Mehta Committee recommendations on Pan-
chayati Raj Institutions (PRIs)?
(a) 	Constitutional recognition to the PRIs
(b) 	Non-involvement of political parties in elections to the PRIs
(c) 	Reservation of seats for SCs and STs
(d) 	A minister-in-charge of Panchayati Raj
39. Consider the following statements:
The 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act provided:
1. 	For 27% reservation of seats in the Panchayats for the Other Backward Castes (OBCs).
2. 	That the Chairpersons of the Panchayats at intermediate or district level, shall be elected by,
and from amongst the elected members thereof.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
40. Consider the following statements in reference to the Constitution (73rd Amendment) Act
1. 	The Governor of a State shall constitute a Finance Commission every fifth year to review the
financial position of the Panchayats.
2. 	The superintendence, direction and control of all elections to the Panchayats are vested in a
State Election Commission.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 227] ---
V.14 | Objective Indian Polity
41. Which one of the following committees had recommended people’s participation in community
development programmes?
(a) 	Ashok Mehta Committee
(b) 	Balwant Rai Mehta Committee
(c) 	Rural-urban Relationship Committee
(d) 	L.M. Singhvi Committee
42. Statement I: 	The 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act is the culmination of the process of
democratic decentralisation.
Statement II: The state should take steps to organize village panchayats and endow them with
such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as units
of self-government.
Codes:
(a) 	Both the statements are individually true and Statement II is the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(b) 	Both the statements are individually true but Statement II is not the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(c) 	Statement I is true but Statement II is false.
(d) 	Statement I is false but Statement II is true.
43. Consider the following with reference to 73rd Constitutional Amendment in respect of Pan-
chayati Raj:
1. 	Direct elections of members at all levels
2. 	Direct elections of chairpersons at the village level
3. 	Indirect election of chairpersons at the intermediate levels and district levels
4. 	Mandatory provision for holding elections
Which of the above are correct?
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 2, 3 and 4
(c) 	1, 2 and 4 	(d) 1, 3 and 4
44. Which one of the following government documents first suggested for having elections of Pan-
chayati Raj Institutions on political party basis?
(a) 	Report of the Administrative Reforms Commission
(b) 	Ashok Mehta Committee Report
(c) 	Balwant Rai Mehta Committee Report
(d) 	Diwakar Committee Report
45. Consider the following with respect to the revolutionary features of the 73rd Constitutional
Amendment:
1. 	Bestowal of Constitutional status on Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs).
2. 	Mandatory elections to PRIs.
3. 	Introduction of third tier of Government with powers in rural India.
4. 	33% reservation of seats and chairpersonships for women in the Panchayats at each level.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 228] ---
Panchayati Raj | V.15
Which of these are correct?
(a) 	1 and 4 	(b) 1, 2 and 3
(c) 	3 and 4 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
46. Under which provision does the Governor of a State constitute a State Finance Commission to
review the financial position of Panchayats?
(a) 	Under the discretionary powers of the Governor
(b) 	By a resolution passed in the Legislative Assembly
(c) 	In accordance with the Article 243-1 of the Constitution of India
(d) 	In accordance with a resolution passed in the Rajya Sabha
47. Consider the following statements:
73rd Amendment of the Constitution has provided constitutional sanction for:
1. 	Building a three-tier structure of Panchayati Raj
2. 	Reservation of seats for women
3. 	Withdrawal of the right of governments to hold elections to Panchayats
4. 	Taking away the right of State Governments to give grants to Panchayats
Which of these statements are correct?
(a) 	l and 2 	(b) 1, 2 and 3
(c) 	2, 3 and 4 	(d) 1 and 4
48. In which part of the Indian Constitution, has the provision for panchayats been made?
(a) 	Part IX 	(b) Part IV
(c) 	Part III 	(d) Part IX-A
49. Which one of the following committees recommended the separation of regulatory and develop-
ment functions at the district level?
(a) 	Dantwallah Committee
(b) 	Hanumantha Rao Committee
(c) 	Kothari Committee
(d) 	G.V.K. Rao Committee
50. Who recommends to the Governor the principles which should govern the distribution between
the State and the Panchayats of the net proceeds of the taxes, tolls and fees leviable by the state
which may be divided between them?
(a) 	Zilla Parishad 	(b) Chief Minister
(c) 	Finance Minister of the State 	(d) State Finance Commission
51. Which of the following are provided for in the 73rd Constitutional Amendment?
1. 	Elections through the Chief Election Commissioner.
2. 	Devolution of functions by the state government.
3. 	Creation of the State Finance Commission.
4. 	Setting up a three-tiered Indian Federation.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 229] ---
V.16 | Objective Indian Polity
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	3 and 4 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
52. The Ashok Mehta Committee (1977) was recommended for the establishment of:
(a) 	Mandal Panchayat 	(b) Nagar Panchayat
(c) 	Panchayat Samiti 	(d) Gram Panchayat
53. The Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution relating to the Panchayats contains:
(a) 	18 items 	(b) 28 items
(c) 	19 items 	(d) 29 items
54. Consider the following statements with respect to the 73rd Constitutional Amendment:
1. 	For 27% reservation to the Other Backward Classes.
2. 	That the chairperson of the panchayat at intermediate/district level shall be elected by, and
from amongst the elected members thereof.
3. 	For reservation for SCs/STs.
4. 	For uniform five-year term for local bodies.
Which of these is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) 1 and 2
(c) 	2, 3 and 4 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
55. As per Article 243-H of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, the Legislature of a State, may by
law, provide for making grants-in-aid to the Panchayats from:
(a) 	Contingency Fund of the President
(b) 	Contingency Fund of the Governor
(c) 	Consolidated Fund of the State
(d) 	Consolidated Fund of India
56. Which one of the following provisions has been left to the will of the State Governments in the
73rd Constitutional Amendment Act?
(a) 	Providing reservation to the Backward Classes
(b) 	All posts at all levels to be filled by direct elections
(c) 	Reservation of seats for SC/ST in proportion to their population
(d) 	Reservation up to 1/3 seats for women in panchayats
57. Consider the following Committees set up to study the structure, powers and functions to be as-
signed to Panchayati Raj Institutions:
1. 	Santhanam Committee
2. 	Ashok Mehta Committee
3. 	Balwantrai Mehta Committee G.V.K. Rao Committee
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 230] ---
Panchayati Raj | V.17
Which one of the following is their correct chronological order?
(a) 	3-4-2-1 	(b) 2-1-3-4
(c) 	3-1-2-4 	(d) 2-4-3-1
1. 	(c) 	2. 	(a) 	3. 	(a) 	4. 	(b) 	5. 	(a)
6. 	(d) 	7. 	(d) 	8. 	(b) 	9. 	(d) 	10. 	(b)
11. 	(b) 	12. 	(b) 	13. 	(b) 	14. 	(a) 	15. 	(a)
16. 	(d) 	17. 	(d) 	18. 	(a) 	19. 	(a) 	20. 	(d)
21. 	(a) 	22. 	(c) 	23. 	(c) 	24. 	(a) 	25. 	(c)
26. 	(c) 	27. 	(b) 	28. 	(a) 	29. 	(a) 	30. 	(d)
31. 	(b) 	32. 	(b) 	33. 	(b) 	34. 	(d) 	35. 	(d)
36. 	(a) 	37. 	(a) 	38. 	(b) 	39. 	(b) 	40. 	(c)
41. 	(b)` 	42. 	(b) 	43. 	(d) 	44. 	(b) 	45. 	(d)
46. 	(c) 	47. 	(a) 	48. 	(a) 	49. 	(d) 	50. 	(d)
51. 	(d) 	52. 	(a) 	53. 	(d) 	54. 	(c) 	55. 	(c)
56. 	(a) 	57. 	(c)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 231] ---
V.18 | Objective Indian Polity
Municipalities
Thirty Five
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Chairperson of every District Planning Committee shall forward the development plan as
recommended by such Committee to the Governor of the State.
2. 	Not less than two-thirds of the total number of members of the District Planning Committee
shall be elected, from amongst, the elected members of the Panchayat at the district level and
the Municipalities in the district.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	In an urban area where municipal services are being provided by an industrial establishment, it
is still mandatory to constitute a Municipality under the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act.
2. 	It is obligatory to constitute Ward Committees for one or more wards within the territorial
area of a Municipality having a population of 3 lakhs or more.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 232] ---
Municipalities | V.19
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
3. 	Which of the following statements regarding the Seventy-Fourth Amendment to the Constitution
of India are correct?
1. 	It provides for the insertion of a new Schedule to the Constitution.
2. 	It restructures the working of the municipalities.
3. 	It provides for the reservation of seats for women and Scheduled Castes in the municipalities.
4. 	It is applicable only to some specified states.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 1,2 and 4
(c) 	1, 3 and 4 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
4. 	Consider the following:
1. 	District Board
2. 	Municipal Corporation
3. 	Notified Area Authority and Town Area Committee
4. 	Township Committee and Port Trust
Which of these is/are urban local body / bodies in India?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	1, 3 and 4 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
5. 	As per the Constitution (74 th Amendment) Act, Legislatures of States have not been conferred the
power to empower municipalities with the responsibility of:
(a) 	Preparation of plans for economic development and social justice
(b) 	Management of law and order
(c) 	Implementation of schemes as may be entrusted to them
(d) 	Levy, collection and appropriation of taxes, duties, tolls, etc
6. 	Which one of the following is not correct?
Part IX-A of the Constitution of India pertaining to the Municipalities provides
(a) 	That grants-in-aid be made to the Municipalities from the Consolidated Fund of the State
(b) 	For setting up a separate Finance Commission for the Municipalities
(c) 	For setting up Committee for District Planning
(d) 	For setting up Committee for Metropolitan Planning
7. 	The sources of revenue of urban local bodies in India are:
1. 	Taxes 	2. Fees and fines
3. 	Grants 	4. Loans
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 233] ---
V.20 | Objective Indian Polity
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 1 and 3
(c) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(d) 1, 3 and 4
8. 	‘A transitional area’, ‘a smaller urban area’ or ‘a larger urban area’ in the context of a Nagar Pan-
chayat, a Municipal Council or a Municipal Corporation, are specified by the Governor after con-
sidering which of the following:
1. 	Density of population
2. 	Percentage of employment in non-agricultural activities
3. 	Number of hospitals in the area
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 1 and 2, only
(c) 	2 and 3, only 	(d) 1 and 3, only
9. 	Which one of the following functions is not the concern of the Local Government in India?
(a) 	Public health 	(b) Sanitation
(c) 	Public utility services 	(d) Maintenance of public order
10. Which one of the following Constitution (Amendment) Acts provided for the formation of the
Metropolitan Planning Committee?
(a) 	42nd Constitution (Amendment) Act
(b) 	44th Constitution (Amendment) Act
(c) 	73rd Constitution (Amendment) Act
(d) 	74th Constitution (Amendment) Act
11. Which of the following statements is not correct?
(a) 	A Metropolitan area is specified by the Governor through a public notification.
(b) 	Metropolitan area means an area having a population of 8 lakhs or more.
(c) 	Metropolitan area may be comprised in more than one district.
(d) 	Metropolitan area may consist of more than two Municipalities or Panchayats or other
contiguous areas.
12. According to the Constitution of India, it is obligatory to constitute ‘Ward Committees’ in the
area of a municipality. The population of such municipality should be:
(a) 	One lac or more 	(b) Two lacs or more
(c) 	Three lacs or more 	(d) Five lacs or more
13. Consider the following objectives:
1. 	Bringing about uniformity in the structure of local governments throughout the country
2. 	Ensuring regular and rational flow of funds from the State’s revenue
3. 	Having properly elected governments at regular intervals
4. 	Having single unified authority for the city’s management and development
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 234] ---
Municipalities | V.21
Which of these did the 74th Amendment to the Constitution of India, try to inject into the work-
ing of urban local bodies?
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 1, 3 and 4
(c) 	1, 2 and 3 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
14. In 1989, the 64th and 65th Amendment Bills were not passed and the Amendment Acts could not
come in force at that time because:
(a) 	Lok Sabha was dissolved in November, 1989.
(b) 	Lok Sabha could not pass the Bills for lack of required majority.
(c) 	Rajya Sabha could not pass the Bills due to lack of required majority.
(d) 	The President sent the Bills for reconsideration.
15. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Items) 	(Articles)
A. 	Constitution of Municipalities 	1. 	Article 243Q
B. 	Reservation of seats in Municipal Bodies 	2. 	Article 243T
C. 	State Finance Commission 	3. 	Article 243Y
D. 	Duration of Municipalities 	4. 	Article 243U
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	3 	4 	1 	2
(b) 	1 	2 	3 	4
(c) 	3 	2 	1 	4
(d) 	1 	4 	3 	2
16. Which one of the following statements with regard to Finance Commission in States is not cor-
rect?
(a) 	The 74th Amendment of the Constitution of India provides for the establishment of a
Finance Commission by a State to review the financial position of the municipalities.
(b) 	The Chief Minister of the State decides the composition of the Finance Commission and
nominates the Chairman.
(c) 	The Finance Commission is expected to recommend the division of resources between the
State and the municipalities within the State.
(d) 	The Finance Commission is authorised to make recommendations with regard to grants-in-
aid to the Panchayats from the Consolidated Fund of a State.
17. Who among the following is hailed as the father of local self-government in India?
(a) 	Lord Mayo 	(b) Lord Ripon
(c) 	Jawaharlal Nehru 	(d) Mahatma Gandhi
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 235] ---
V.22 | Objective Indian Polity
18. Municipal Area means the territorial area of a Municipality as is notified by the:
(a) 	Governor 	(b) Municipal Commissioner
(c) 	Municipal Council 	(d) Council of Ministers
19. To whom does the Chairperson of every Metropolitan Planning Committee forward the develop-
ment plan, as recommended by such a Committee?
(a) 	The Planning Commission
(b) 	The Finance Minister, Government of India
(c) 	The Urban Development Minister, Government of India
(d) 	The Government of the State
20. The Constitution (74th Amendment) Act, 1992 provides for which of the following?
1. 	Municipal Committees
2. 	Ward Committees
3. 	Committee for District Planning
4. 	Committee for Metropolitan Planning
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 3 	(b) 2 and 4
(c) 	1, 2 and 3 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
21. Nagar Palika bill was first introduced in Parliament during the prime ministership of
(a) 	V.P. Singh 	(b) Chandrasekhar
(c) 	Rajiv Gandhi 	(d) Narasimha Rao
22. Which of the following is correct in respect of financial powers of local governments in India?
(a) 	Local Governments have constitutionally earmarked taxation powers.
(b) 	Local Governments are empowered to levy such taxes as are permitted under the law.
(c) 	Local Governments are empowered to levy charges on all items within their sphere of
activities.
(d) 	Local Governments are empowered to levy taxes with the permission of the department
concerned.
23. Under which Article of the Constitution of India, did the District Planning Committee come into
existence?
(a) 	Article 243 ZD 	(b) Article 243 ZE
(c) 	Article 244 ZD 	(d) Article 242 ZD
24. Which of the following functions have been laid down in the 12th Schedule of the Constitution of
India for the municipalities?
1. 	Urban poverty alleviation
2. 	Planning for economic and social development
3. 	Regulation for tanneries
4. 	Urban forestry
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 236] ---
Municipalities | V.23
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 2, 3 and 4
(c) 	1 and 4 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
25. Which of the following units of urban local self-government does not have a constitutional foun-
dation?
(a) 	Cantonment Boards 	(b) Municipal Councils
(c) 	Municipal Corporations 	(d) Nagar Panchayats
26. 73rd and 74 th Amendments to the Constitution of India provide for elections to the local bodies:
(a) 	Every year 	(b) After every three years
(c) 	After every five years 	(d) After every two years
27. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Functionary) 	(Institution)
A. 	Sarpanch 	1. 	Municipal Corporation
B. 	Chairman 	2. 	Village Panchayat
C. 	Mayor 	3. 	Municipality
D. 	Counsellor 	4. 	Cantonment Board
5. 	Ward
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	3 	4 	1 	5
(b) 	4 	3 	2 	1
(c) 	2 	3 	1 	5
(d) 	2 	5 	4 	3
28. An election to constitute a municipality has to be completed:
(a) 	Immediately on completion of its term of five years
(b) 	Before the expiry of its fixed tenure
(c) 	Before the expiry of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution
(d) 	Before the expiry of a period of three months from the date of its dissolution
29. To which of the following, the 74th Constitutional Amendment has not paid attention?
1. 	Municipal personnel system
2. 	Constitution and composition of municipality
3. 	Relations between elected executive and bureaucracy
4. 	Disqualifications for membership of municipality
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 237] ---
V.24 | Objective Indian Polity
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 4 only 	(b) 1 and 3 only
(c) 	2, 3 and 4 	(d) 1, 2 and 3
30. Who consolidates the plans prepared by the Panchayats and Municipalities in the district?
(a) 	State Planning Commission
(b) 	Public Accounts Committee
(c) 	District Planning Committee
(d) 	District Planning and Development Council
31. The first municipal corporation that was established in India is at
(a) 	Madras 	(b) Delhi
(c) 	Bombay 	(d) Hyderabad
32. The Metropolitan Planning Committee while preparing the draft plan has to give due regard to:
1. 	Matters of common interest between Municipalities and Panchayats
2. 	Overall objectives and priorities set by the Union Government
3. 	Plans prepared by Panchayats in Metropolitan area
4. 	Contingent circumstances emerging out of natural calamities
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(b) 2 and 4
(c) 	1 and 3 	(d) 1, 2 and 3
33. Consider the following pairs:
1. 	Cantonment Board 	: 	Administered centrally by Defence Ministry
2. 	Notified Area Committee 	: 	Administers newly developing towns
3. 	Municipal Council 	: 	Administers big cities with complex problems
4. 	Municipal Corporation 	: 	Headed by an elected Mayor
Which of these pairs are correctly matched?
(a) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(b) 1 and 4
(c) 	1, 2 and 4 	(d) 2 and 3
34. Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992 has added 16 Articles and a new
Schedule in the Constitution of India.
2. 	The Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 has added 18 Articles but no new
Schedule in the Constitution of India.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 238] ---
Municipalities | V.25
35. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Urban Bodies) 	(Features)
A. 	Town Area Committee 	1. 	No elected members
B. 	Port Trust 	2. 	Semi-municipal authority
C. 	Township 	3. 	Created by an Act of Parliament
D. 	Town Improvement Trust 	4. 	Special Purpose Agency
5. 	Works under Defence Ministry
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	1 	5 	2 	4
(b) 	2 	3 	1 	4
(c) 	1 	5 	4 	3
(d) 	2 	1 	5 	3
36. The following are associated with well known local government policies:
1. 	Balwant Rai Mehta
2. 	Lord Mayo
3. 	Lord Ripon
4. 	Ashok Mehta
Which is the correct chronological sequence of the above?
Choose the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(b) 2, 3, 1 and 4
(c) 	3, 2, 4 and 1 	(d) 4, 1, 3 and 2
37. Which of the following are the sources of revenue of urban local bodies?
1. 	Property tax
2. 	Octroi
3. 	Sales tax
4. 	Animal tax
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 2, 3 and 4
(c) 	1, 3 and 4 	(d) 1, 2 and 4
38. Consider the following statements:
1. 	The State Finance Commissions receive grants directly from the Finance Commission set up
by the Union Government.
2. 	The State Finance Commissions review the economic conditions of the various Panchayati
Raj Institutions and Municipal Bodies in the States.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 239] ---
V.26 | Objective Indian Polity
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
39. Statement I: The Directorates of Local Bodies in States supervise the working of Municipal
Corporations.
Statement II: The State governments need to exercise control over all the local bodies.
Codes:
(a) 	Both the statements are individually true and Statement II is the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(b) 	Both the statements are individually true but Statement II is not the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(c) 	Statement I is true but Statement II is false.
(d) 	Statement I is false but Statement II is true.
40. In which pair of Schedules of the Constitution, the functions of Panchayats and Municipalities
are incorporated?
(a) 	8th and 9th
(b) 	9th and 10th
(c) 	10th and 11th
(d) 	11th and 12th
41. The Chairperson of a District Planning Committee forwards the development plan recommended
by the Committee to which one of the following?
(a) 	The State Government
(b) 	The District Development Officer
(c) 	The District Collector
(d) 	Chairperson, Zilla Parishad
42. Consider the following statements:
1. 	Local government including self-government institutions in both urban and rural areas is a
subject under the Concurrent List of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India.
2. 	Provisions inserted in the Constitution of India by article 243-243ZG are in the nature of
basic provisions.
3. 	These provisions have to be supplemented by laws made by the respective State Legislatures.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 and 2 	(b) Only 2 and 3
(c) 	Only 3 	(d) 1, 2 and 3
43. When was the first municipal corporation in India at Madras set up?
(a) 	1587 	(b) 1687
(c) 	1787 	(d) 1887
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 240] ---
Municipalities | V.27
44. Regarding the Municipalities, who makes the provisions with respect to the composition and the
territorial area of a Wards Committee?
(a) 	Municipal Commissioner
(b) 	District Collector
(c) 	State Legislature by law
(d) 	State Election Commissioner
45. Which one of the following is not correct for the Local Government?
(a) 	A constitutional obligation for the Village Panchayats to function as units of self-government
(b) 	The Constitution places the subject of local self-government as a responsibility of the states
(c) 	A constitutional obligation for the states to constitute Finance Commission to ensure financial
viability of Municipalities
(d) 	A constitutional obligation for the Municipalities to carry out schemes related to public
distribution system
46. In which one of the following Schedules of the Constitution of India, is Urban Local Self-Gov-
ernment mentioned?
(a) 	Seventh Schedule 	(b) Eighth Schedule
(c) 	Eleventh Schedule 	(d) Twelfth Schedule
47. Which one of the following has the authority to constitute an area into a municipality or a munici-
pal corporation or a panchayat?
(a) 	Central Government
(b) 	Divisional Commissioner
(c) 	District Collector
(d) 	State Government
48. A metropolitan committee can be set up in an area having a population of:
(a) 	3 lac - 4.99 lac 	(b) 5 lac - 9.99 lac
(c) 	Upto 10 lac 	(d) Above 10 lac
49. Consider the following statements with respect to the Constitutional (Seventy-fourth Amend-
ment) Act, 1992:
It provided for:
1. 	Three-tier municipalities
2. 	Ward committees
3. 	District Planning Committees
4. 	Direct election of chairperson of a municipality
Which of these is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	1, 2 and 3 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 241] ---
V.28 | Objective Indian Polity
50. Statement I: 	Multiplicity of authorities in urban areas has added to the problems of citizens.
Statement II: New special purpose agencies have been created for urban functions.
Codes:
(a) 	Both the statements are individually true and Statement II is the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(b) 	Both the statements are individually true but Statement II is not the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(c) 	Statement I is true but Statement II is false.
(d) 	Statement I is false but Statement II is true.
51. The State Government’s administrative control over municipalities does not include power:
(a) 	Of inspection 	(b) Of approving bye-laws and rules
(c) 	To decide over-borrowings 	(d) Of dissolution and supersession
52. Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Constitution (74th Amendment) Act introduced a new part IX-A in the Constitution of
India.
2. 	The provisions of the Constitution (74th Amendment) Act also apply to the Scheduled Areas
and Tribal Areas.
3. 	The Constitution (74th Amendment) Act specifies the manner and procedure of election of
the Chairperson of a Municipal Corporation.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	1 only 	(b) 3 only
(c) 	l and 2 	(d) 1, 2 and 3
1. 	(d) 	2. 	(b) 	3. 	(a) 	4. 	(d) 	5. 	(b)
6. 	(b) 	7. 	(c) 	8. 	(b) 	9. 	(d) 	10. 	(d)
11. 	(b) 	12. 	(c) 	13. 	(c) 	14. 	(c) 	15. 	(b)
16. 	(b) 	17. 	(b) 	18. 	(a) 	19. 	(d) 	20. 	(d)
21. 	(c) 	22. 	(b) 	23. 	(a) 	24. 	(d) 	25. 	(a)
26. 	(c) 	27. 	(c) 	28. 	(b) 	29. 	(b) 	30. 	(c)
31. 	(a) 	32. 	(d) 	33. 	(c) 	34. 	(a) 	35. 	(b)
36. 	(b) 	37. 	(d) 	38. 	(b) 	39. 	(a) 	40. 	(d)
41. 	(a)` 	42. 	(b) 	43. 	(b) 	44. 	(c) 	45. 	(d)
46. 	(a) 	47. 	(d) 	48. 	(d) 	49. 	(b) 	50. 	(a)
51. 	(c) 	52. 	(a)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 242] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 243] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 244] ---
Union Territories
and Special Areas
Six
Thirty Six 	Union Territories
Thirty Seven 	Scheduled and Tribal Areas
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 245] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 246] ---
Union Territories
Thirty Six
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	An administrator of a union territory is an agent of the President of India and not head of
state like a Governor.
2. 	The Parliament can make laws on any subject of the three lists (including the state list) for the
Union territories.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	The President can make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of the:
1. 	Andaman and Nicobar Islands 	2. Lakshadweep
3. 	Dadra and Nagar Haveli 	4. Daman and Diu
5. 	Chandigarh
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 	(b) 1, 2, 3 and 4
(c) 	2, 3, 4 and 5 	(d) 1, 2 and 3
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 247] ---
VI.6 | Objective Indian Polity
3. 	Which of the following is correct regarding the union territories?
1. 	Articles 239 to 241 contain provisions regarding the union territories.
2. 	Part VIII of the Constitution deal with the union territories.
3. 	Part VII of the Constitution deal with the union territories.
4. 	Articles 238 to 242 contain provisions regarding the union territories.
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 3 	(b) 1 and 2
(c) 	3 and 4 	(d) 2 and 4
4. 	Which of the following Constitutional Amendment Acts provides a special status to the Union
Territory of Delhi and redesignated it the National Capital Territory of Delhi?
(a) 	59th Amendment Act 	(b) 62nd Amendment Act
(c) 	67th Amendment Act 	(d) 69th Amendment Act
5. 	Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Union Territories) 	(Judiciary)
A. 	Andaman and Nicobar Islands 	1. 	Under Bombay High Court
B. 	Dadra and Nagar Haveli 	2. 	Under Madras High Court
C. 	Lakshadweep 	3. 	Under Punjab High Court
D. 	Puducherry 	4. 	Under Calcutta High Court
5. 	Under Kerala High Court
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	2 	1 	5 	4
(b) 	4 	1 	5 	2
(c) 	4 	3 	2 	1
(d) 	2 	5 	4 	3
6. 	The Part ‘C’ and Part ‘D’ states were constituted as the ‘union territories’ by the:
(a) 	5th Constitutional Amendment Act 	(b) 16th Constitutional Amendment Act
(c) 	14th Constitutional Amendment Act 	(d) 7th Constitutional Amendment Act
7. 	Which of the following are the reasons for the creation of Union Territories?
1. 	Special treatment of the tribal people
2. 	Cultural distinctiveness
3. 	Strategic importance
4. 	Care of the backward people
5. 	Political and administrative considerations
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 248] ---
Union Territories | VI.7
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 3 and 5 	(b) 2, 3, 4 and 5
(c) 	1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 5
8. 	Who/which of the following can put a union territory under the jurisdiction of the high court of
adjacent state?
(a) 	President of India
(b) 	Chief Justice of India
(c) 	Parliament of India
(d) 	Administrator of the concerned union territory
9. 	Which one of the following union territories has a high court of its own?
(a) 	Puducherry 	(b) Chandigarh
(c) 	Delhi 	(d) Lakshadweep
10. In the case of Puducherry, the President of India can legislate by making regulations only:
(a) 	When the Parliament passes a resolution to that effect
(b) 	When the Assembly passes a resolution to that effect
(c) 	When the Assembly is suspended or dissolved
(d) 	When the Lt. Governor requests him to do so
11. Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Constitution of India contains separate provisions for the administration of acquired
territories.
2. 	The constitutional provisions for the administration of union territories also apply to the
acquired territories.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
1. 	(c) 	2. 	(b) 	3. 	(b) 	4. 	(d) 	5. 	(b)
6. 	(d) 	7. 	(c) 	8. 	(c) 	9. 	(c) 	10. 	(c)
11. 	(b)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 249] ---
VI.8 | Objective Indian Polity
Scheduled and Tribal Areas
Thirty Seven
1. 	Who/Which of the following is empowered to declare an area to be a scheduled area?
(a) 	Governor of the State
(b) 	Legislative Assembly of the State
(c) 	Parliament of India
(d) 	President of India
2. 	Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India makes special administrative provisions in regard to
the tribal areas in:
(a) 	Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram
(b) 	Meghalaya, Assam, Nagaland and Manipur
(c) 	Tripura, Manipur, Mizoram and Meghalaya
(d) 	Arunanchal Pradesh, Nagaland, Assam and Tripura
3. 	What is the maximum number of members in a Tribes Advisory Council?
(a) 	20 members 	(b) 25 members
(c) 	28 members 	(d) 34 members
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 250] ---
Scheduled and Tribal Areas | VI.9
4. 	As per the sixth schedule to the Constitution of India, the rules for the first Constitution of Dis-
trict and Regional Councils are prepared by:
(a) 	The Ministry of Home, Government of India
(b) 	The Chief Minister in consultation with existing tribal councils or other representative tribal
organisations of the region
(c) 	The Governor in consultation with existing tribal councils or other representative tribal
organisations of the region
(d) 	The State Legislature
5. 	Which Article of the Constitution of India envisages a special system of administration for sched-
uled areas and tribal areas?
(a) 	Article 242 	(b) Article 244
(c) 	Article 246 	(d) Article 248
6. 	Which/Who of the following can appoint a commission to examine and report on any matter
relating to the administration of the autonomous districts or regions?
(a) 	Legislative Assembly of the State
(b) 	Governor of the State
(c) 	President of India
(d) 	Parliament of India
7. 	Which schedule of the Constitution of India deals with the administration and control of sched-
uled areas and scheduled tribes?
(a) 	Fourth Schedule
(b) 	Fifth Schedule
(c) 	Sixth Schedule
(d) 	Seventh Schedule
8. 	The Autonomous District Council, under the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution, is not operative
in which one of the following states of North-East India?
(a) 	Assam 	(b) Tripura
(c) 	Nagaland 	(d) Meghalaya
9. 	How many members of a district council are nominated by the Governor of the State?
(a) 	2 members 	(b) 4 members
(c) 	5 members 	(d) 7 members
10. Who/Which of the following is empowered to direct that a law of Parliament does not apply to
a scheduled area?
(a) 	President of India 	(b) Supreme Court of India
(c) 	High Court of the State 	(d) Governor of the State
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 251] ---
VI.10 | Objective Indian Polity
1. 	(d) 	2. 	(a) 	3. 	(a) 	4. 	(c) 	5. 	(b)
6. 	(b) 	7. 	(b) 	8. 	(c) 	9. 	(b) 	10. 	(d)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 252] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 253] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 254] ---
Constitutional
Bodies
Seven
Thirty Eight 	Election Commission
Thirty Nine 	Union Public Service Commission
Forty 	State Public Service Commission
Forty One 	Finance Commission
Forty Two 	National Commission for SCs
Forty Three 	National Commission for STs
Forty Four 	Special Officer for Linguistic Minorities
Forty Five 	Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
Forty Six 	Attorney General of India
Forty Seven 	Advocate General of the State
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 255] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam