
--- [PDF PAGE 80] ---
Parliamentary System
Twelve
1. 	Which of the following are the principles on the basis of which the Parliamentary system of gov-
ernment in India operates?
1. 	Nominal Executive Head
2. 	Vice-President as the Chairman of the Upper House
3. 	Real executive authority with the Council of Ministers
4. 	Executive responsibility to the Lower House
Choose the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 1, 2 and 4
(c) 	1, 3 and 4 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
2. 	The Constitution of India establishes parliamentary form of Government, and the essence of this
form of government is its responsibility to the:
(a) 	People of India 	(b) President
(c) 	Prime Minister 	(d) Legislature
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 81] ---
II.6 | Objective Indian Polity
3. 	Under a cabinet form of Government, the cabinet generally remains in office:
(a) 	For a fixed term
(b) 	So long as it enjoys the confidence of the popular chamber of legislature
(c) 	So long as it enjoys the confidence of the head of state
(d) 	So long as it enjoys the confidence of the electorate
4. 	In the parliamentary form of Government, the members of the Council of Ministers are collec-
tively responsible to:
(a) 	The Head of State
(b) 	The Chairman of the Upper House and the Speaker of the Lower House
(c) 	The popular House of the Parliament
(d) 	The Prime Minister
5. 	Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Types of Government) 	(Characteristics)
A. 	Parliamentary Government 	1. 	Centralisation of powers
B. 	Presidential Government 	2. 	Division of powers
C. 	Federal System 	3. 	Separation of powers
D. 	Unitary System 	4. 	Collective responsibility
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	2 	1 	4 	3
(b) 	4 	3 	2 	1
(c) 	2 	3 	4 	1
(d) 	4 	1 	2 	3
6. 	Assertion (A): In a parliamentary democracy like India the Government goes out of power if the
Lower House passes a no-confidence motion against the Government.
Reason (R): 	The Constitution of India provides for the removal of the Prime Minister through
a no-confidence motion passed in the Lok Sabha.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
7. 	Which one of the following is the main principle on which the Parliamentary system operates?
(a) 	Supremacy of Parliament 	(b) Responsibility of Executive to Legislature
(c) 	Supremacy of Judiciary 	(d) Theory of Separation of Power
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 82] ---
Parliamentary System | II.7
8. 	In a parliamentary form of Government, ministers are appointed by:
(a) 	The head of the state at his discretion
(b) 	The head of the government
(c) 	The head of the state on the recommendations of the head of the government
(d) 	The legislature
9. 	Which one of the following is not an essential feature of the parliamentary system?
(a) 	Fusion of the Executive and the Legislature (b) Nominal head of the state
(c) 	Collective responsibility 	(d) Fixed tenure of the executive
10. Assertion (A): Parliamentary system of government is based on the principle of collective
responsibility.
Reason (R): 	A parliamentary defeat is not necessarily a sufficient cause for resignation of the
Ministry.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
11. Consider the following features:
1. 	Presence of a nominal or titular head of state.
2. 	Collective responsibility of cabinet
3. 	Accountability of executive to the legislature
4. 	Separation of Powers
Which of these are the features of a parliamentary form of Government?
(a) 	2, 3 and 4 	(b) 1, 2 and 4
(c) 	1, 3 and 4 	(d) 1, 2 and 3
1. 	(c) 	2. 	(d) 	3. 	(b) 	4. 	(c) 	5. 	(b)
6. 	(b) 	7. 	(b) 	8. 	(c) 	9. 	(d) 	10. 	(c)
11. 	(d)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 83] ---
II.8 | Objective Indian Polity
Federal System
Thirteen
1. 	Which of the following federal principles are not found in Indian federation?
1. 	Bifurcation of the judiciary between the Federal and State Governments
2. 	Equality of representation of the states in the upper house of the Federal Legislature
3. 	The Union cannot be destroyed by any state seceding from the Union at its will
4. 	Federal Government can redraw the map of the Indian Union by forming new States
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 2, 3 and 4
(c) 	1 and 2 	(d) 3 and 4
2. 	The Constitution of India is federal in character because:
(a) 	The Head of the State (the President) is elected by an electoral college consisting of the elected
members of both the Houses of Parliament and the elected members of the Legislative
Assemblies of the States.
(b) 	The Governors of States are appointed by the President and they hold office during the
pleasure of the President.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 84] ---
Federal System | II.9
(c) 	There is distribution of powers between the Union and the States.
(d) 	The amendment of the Constitution can be made only by following the procedure laid down
in the Constitution and in some cases the amendment requires ratification by Legislatures of
the States.
3. 	Assertion (A): Article 1 of the Constitution of India describes India as a Union of States rather
than a federal state.
Reason (R): 	Indian federation is not the result of an agreement by the units; and the component
units have no freedom to secede from it.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
4. 	In the Constitution of India, the term ‘Federal’:
(a) 	Figures in the Preamble 	(b) Figures in Part III of the Constitution
(c) 	Figures in Article 368 	(d) Does not figure anywhere
5. 	When can the Parliament legislate on a subject in the state list?
(a) 	If the Parliament passes a resolution to that effect in the national interest.
(b) 	If the Supreme Court grants necessary authority to the Parliament.
(c) 	If the Rajya Sabha passes a resolution by two-thirds majority declaring that the subject in the
state list under consideration is of national importance.
(d) 	If the President issues an ordinance transferring the subject from the state list to the union or
the concurrent lists.
6. 	The quotation, “The Indian Constitution establishes, indeed, a system of government which is at
the most quasi-federal, a unitary State with subsidiary federal features rather than the federal State
with unitary features” is attributed to:
(a) 	I. Jennings 	(b) G. Austin
(c) 	K.C. Wheare 	(d) H.J. Laski
7. 	What does the term “Federation” imply?
(a) 	Fusion of powers 	(b) Separation of powers
(c) 	Division of powers 	(d) Devolution of powers
8. 	Assertion (A): India is a Union of States and not a Federal State.
Reason (R): 	In the Indian Constitution, the Centre is given emergency powers which can
convert the Federal State into a Unitary State.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 85] ---
II.10 | Objective Indian Polity
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
9. 	The best form of federalism suited for countries like India is:
(a) 	Centralised federalism 	(b) Bargaining federalism
(c) 	Cooperative federalism 	(d) Conflicting federalism
10. Under the Indian Constitution, the residuary powers are vested in the:
(a) 	Executive 	(b) Judiciary
(c) 	Parliament 	(d) State legislatures
11. The structure of the Indian Constitution is:
(a) 	Federal in form and unitary in spirit 	(b) Unitary
(c) 	Unitary in form and federal in spirit 	(d) Pure federal
12. Indian Federation closely resembles:
(a) 	U.S.A. 	(b) Canada
(c) 	Australia 	(d) Nigeria
13. Assertion (A): K.C. Wheare calls Indian Constitution a quasi-federal Constitution.
Reason (R): 	There are three lists (Union, State and Concurrent) in the Seventh Schedule of the
Constitution of India dividing powers between the Centre and the state and giving
residuary powers to the central government.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
14. Parliament has power to legislate with respect to a matter in the State list provided it is in the:
(a) 	National interest 	(b) Interest of the State concerned
(c) 	Interest of the public 	(d) Interest of the minority
15. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Forms of Government) 	(Essential Features)
A. 	Cabinet Government 	1. 	Separation of powers
B. 	Presidential Government 	2. 	Collective responsibility
C. 	Federal Government 	3. 	Concentration of powers
D. 	Unitary Government 	4. 	Division of powers
5. 	Administrative law
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 86] ---
Federal System | II.11
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	3 	4 	2 	5
(b) 	2 	1 	4 	3
(c) 	3 	5 	1 	2
(d) 	4 	1 	2 	5
16. Which among the following is/are the feature (s) of a Federal State ?
1. 	The powers of the Central and the State (Constituent Unit) Governments are clearly laid
down.
2. 	It has an unwritten constitution.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below :
(a) 	Only 1
(b) 	Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2
(d) 	Neither 1 nor 2
17. Which Schedule of the Constitution of India contains the three lists that divide powers between
the Union and the sates ?
(a) 	Fifth Schedule
(b) 	Sixth Schedule
(c) 	Seventh Schedule
(d) 	Eighth Schedule
18. Which one among the following pairs of level of government and legislative power is not cor-
rectly matched ?
(a) 	Central Government 	: 	Union List
(b) 	Local Governments 	: 	Residuary Powers
(c) 	State Governments 	: 	State List
(d) 	Central and State Governments 	: 	Concurrent List
19. Who, among the following, expressed the view that the Indian Constitution is federal in as much
as it establishes what may be called a Dual Polity ?
(a) 	H.M. Seervai
(b) 	K.C. Wheare
(c) 	B.R. Ambedkar
(d) 	Ivor Jennings
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 87] ---
II.12 | Objective Indian Polity
1. 	(c) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(a) 	4. 	(d) 	5. 	(c)
6. 	(c) 	7. 	(c) 	8. 	(a) 	9. 	(c) 	10. 	(c)
11. 	(a) 	12. 	(b) 	13. 	(a) 	14. 	(a) 	15. 	(b)
16. 	(a) 	17. 	(c) 	18. 	(b) 	19. 	(c)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 88] ---
Centre-State Relations | II.13
Centre-State Relations
Fourteen
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	For the Parliament to make laws with respect to any matter enumerated in the State List, a
resolution must be passed in both the Houses of the Parliament.
2. 	A resolution passed as stated above can be extended beyond one year.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Consider the following statements:
The Article 73 of the Constitution of India which deals with the extent of executive power of the
Union, provides that:
1. 	The executive power of the Union extends to all matters with respect to which the Parliament
has the power to make laws.
2. 	The Government of India may also exercise such authority available under any treaty.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 89] ---
II.14 | Objective Indian Polity
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
3. 	Consider the following statements about Union-State relations:
1. 	In case of overlapping of a matter between the three kinds of subjects of legislations,
predominance has been given to the Union Legislation.
2. 	In the concurrent sphere, in the case of repugnancy between a Union and a State law relating
to the same subject, the former prevails, even if the State law was reserved for the assent of
the President and has received such assent.
3. 	The vesting of residual power under the Indian Constitution follows the precedent of Canada
and not that of the Government of India Act, 1935.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 1 and 3
(c) 	2 and 3 	(d) 1, 2 and 3
4. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	With the consent of the Government of India, the Governor of a State may entrust on the
Union Government or to its officers functions relating to a State subject , to which executive
power of that State extends.
2. 	The President of India cannot entrust to any State Government or to its officers, functions
in relation to any matter to which the executive power of the Union extends.
3. 	There is a provision in the Constitution of India to create the National Integration Council.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 2 and 3 only
(c) 	1 and 3 only 	(d) Only 1
5. 	What is the implication of the Union Government giving ‘Special Status’ to a State?
(a) 	Subsequently large percentage of the Central assistance will be grants-in-aid
(b) 	Current account budgetary deficit will be bridged by the Union Government
(c) 	The extent of loan as a percentage of total assistance will be high
(d) 	The Union Government meets entire expenditure of the State during the period of ‘Special
Status’
6. 	Who, among the following, can establish additional courts for better administration of any exist-
ing law with respect to a matter contained in the Union List?
(a) 	Parliament by law 	(b) Parliament with the consent of states
(c) 	Union Government by resolution 	(d) Supreme Court of India
7. 	Assertion (A): The All-India Services violate the federal principle of the Constitution as well as
the autonomy of States.
Reason (R): 	The All-India Service officers are governed by Central Government rules and the
State Governments do not have full control over them.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 90] ---
Centre-State Relations | II.15
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
8. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	Parliament shall, while a proclamation of Emergency is in operation, have the power to
make laws for the whole or any part of territory of India with respect to any of the matters
enumerated in the State List.
2. 	Parliament has exclusive power to make any law with respect to any matter not enumerated in
the Concurrent List or State List.
3. 	Parliament has power to make any law for the whole or any part of the territory of India for
implementing any treaty, agreement or convention with any other country.
4. 	Parliament has power to legislate with respect to a matter in the State List in the national
interest subject to the resolution passed by the Council of States by two-thirds majority.
Which of these statements are correct?
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 1, 2, 3 and 4
(c) 	1, 3 and 4 	(d) 2 and 4
9. 	A law made by Parliament having extra-territorial operation shall:
(a) 	Not be deemed invalid 	(b) Be deemed invalid
(c) 	Be deemed ultravires 	(d) Be deemed unconstitutional
10. Which of the following is not a principal source of non-tax revenue of the Union?
(a) 	Posts and Telegraphs 	(b) Broadcasting
(c) 	Forests 	(d) Opium
11. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Source) 	(Tax)
A. 	Taxes levied by the Union but collected 	1. 	Taxes on income other than agriculture and
appropriated by the States
B. 	Taxes levied, collected and retained by 	2. 	Stamp duties the states
C. 	Taxes levied and collected by the Centre 	3. 	Capitation tax but assigned to the States
D. 	Taxes levied and collected by the Centre 	4. 	Taxes on lands and buildings and distributed
between the Union and the States
5. 	Taxes on consignment of goods in the course of
inter-state trade
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 91] ---
II.16 | Objective Indian Polity
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	1 	5 	4 	2
(b) 	2 	4 	5 	1
(c) 	1 	3 	5 	2
(d) 	2 	5 	4 	1
12. If any directions are issued by the Union Government to a State and they have not been complied
with, then which one of the following statements is correct?
(a) 	It shall be presumed that the constitutional machinery in the State had failed as per Article
365 of the Constitution
(b) It shall be presumed that the State had law and order problem and action under Article 365 is required
(c) 	The Union Government can appoint advisers to help the Governor for performing his functions
(d) 	The Parliament may make laws for that State
13. Which one of the following is the correct statement?
A resolution passed by the Council of States under Article 249 empowering Parliament to legislate
on State subjects in national interest remains in force for a period:
(a) 	Not exceeding six months 	(b) Not exceeding two years
(c) 	Not exceeding one year 	(d) Of unlimited time
14. Which of the following statements regarding the residuary powers in the Constitution of India are
correct?
1. 	Residuary powers have been given to the Union Parliament
2. 	In the matter of residuary powers, the Constitution of India follows the Constitution of
Australia
3. 	The final authority to decide whether a particular matter falls under the residuary power or
not is the Parliament
4. 	The Government of India Act, 1935 placed residuary powers in the hands of the Governor-
General
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	1 and 4 	(d) 3 and 4
15. Assertion (A): The Constitution makes a distinction between the legislative power to levy a tax
and the power to appropriate the proceeds of tax so levied.
Reason (R): 	The constitution provides for grants-in-aid to the states from the central resources.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 92] ---
Centre-State Relations | II.17
16. Which of the following is/are correctly matched?
1. 	Duty levied by the Union but collected and 	: Succession duty and estate duty in respect of
appropriated by the States 	property other than agricultural land
2. 	Taxes levied and collected by the Union but 	: Stamp duties and duties of excise on
assigned to the States 	medicinal and toilet preparations
Choose the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
17. Which of the following constitutional provisions facilitate Union control over States?
1. 	All-India services
2. 	Grants-in-aid
3. 	Inter-State Councils
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 only 	(b) 2 and 3 only
(c) 	1 and 3 only 	(d) 1, 2 and 3
18. The idea of the Union giving directions to the States was adopted by the makers of the Indian
Constitution from:
(a) 	The Government of India Act, 1935 	(b) The US Constitution
(c) 	The Soviet Constitution 	(d) The Australian Constitution
19. Which one of the following statements is not correct?
(a) 	Parliament has exclusive power to make law on any matter in the Union List.
(b) 	Parliament and State Legislatures both have power to make law on any matter in the Concurrent
List.
(c) 	In certain exceptional circumstances, State Legislatures can make law on a subject given in the
Union List.
(d) 	Parliament can make law on State subjects in certain circumstances.
20. Assertion (A): Sarkaria Commission recommended that the Governor of a state should be
appointed after consultation with the Chief Minister of the state.
Reason (R): 	This could be achieved through amending Article 165 of the Indian Constitution.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
21. Who among the following said, “There can be no doubt that the standard of administration de-
pends upon the caliber of civil servants who are appointed to these strategic posts”?
(a) 	Jawaharlal Nehru 	(b) Dr. B.R. Ambedkar
(c) 	Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel 	(d) Warren Hastings
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 93] ---
II.18 | Objective Indian Polity
22. On the subject of Income Tax:
(a) 	The Union Government has more powers than State governments
(b) 	The State governments have more powers than the Union government
(c) 	Both Union and State governments have equal powers but Union shall prevail in case of
conflict
(d) 	Only the Union government has power
23. Verdicts of the Supreme Court of India in which of the following cases have a direct bearing on
Centre-State relations?
1. 	S.R. Bommai Case
2. 	Kesavananda Bharati Case
3. 	Menaka Case
4. 	Indra Sawhney Case
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) 1 and 2
(c) 	1, 2 and 3 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
24. Which one of the following is the correct statement?
The rule of repugnancy has application in a case where:
(a) 	Both Union and State occupy two different fields in different Lists
(b) 	Both Union and State laws are enacted under the Concurrent List
(c) 	The Union law is enacted under List III and State law is enacted under List II
(d) 	The Union and State laws are enacted under the State List
25. Assertion (A): Parliament or a State Legislature should keep within the domain assigned to it and
one should not trespass into the domain reserved for the other.
Reason (R): 	Legislation will be invalid if it encroaches on matters which have been assigned to
another legislature.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
26. Which of the following taxes are levied and collected and retained by the States?
1. 	Taxes on mineral rights
2. 	Taxes on entry of goods into a local area
3. 	Taxes on agricultural income
4. 	Taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 3 and 4 	(b) 1, 2 and 3
(c) 	2 and 3 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 94] ---
Centre-State Relations | II.19
27. Which of the following taxes belong to the Union exclusively?
(a) 	Customs Duties 	(b) Land Revenue
(c) 	Surcharge on Income Tax 	(d) Corporation Tax
28. Consider the following statements:
The executive power of the Union extends to giving of directions to a State in respect of:
1. 	Construction and maintenance of means of communication of national or military importance
2. 	Maintenance of law and order in the State
3. 	Protection of railways within the State
4. 	Protection of secular character of the country
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	1 and 3 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
29. In case of inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and the laws made by the State Legis-
latures, which one of the following shall prevail?
(a) 	The law made by Parliament before the law made by the legislature of the State
(b) 	The law made by Parliament after the law made by the legislature of the State
(c) 	The law made by Parliament before or after the law made by the legislature of the State
(d) 	The law made by the legislature of the State
30. Consider the following pairs:
1. 	Taxes levied by the Union but collected 	: 	Stamp duties and appropriated by the
States
2. 	Taxes levied and collected by the Centre 	: 	Taxes on the sale of goods in the course
but assigned to the States 	of inter-state trade
Which of the pairs given above is/are correctly matched?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
31. Which of the following formed a part of the terms of reference of the Punchhi Commission on
Centre-State Relations constituted by the Government of India?
1. 	Panchayati Raj institutions
2. 	Communal violence
3. 	An integrated domestic market
4. 	Central Law Enforcement Agency
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 4 only 	(b) 2 and 3 only
(c) 	1, 2 and 3 only 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 95] ---
II.20 | Objective Indian Polity
32. Consider the following statements:
The Parliament becomes competent to make law on a matter enumerated in the state list only if the:
1. 	Council of States passes a resolution supported by not less than two-thirds majority of the
members present and voting that it is in the national interest that the Parliament should make
law on such matter.
2. 	Council of States and House of the People, both passes a resolution that it is in the national
interest that the Parliament should make law on such matter.
3. 	President gives the prior permission for such legislation.
4. 	Speaker of the House of the People in consultation with Chairman of the Council of States
gives the prior permission for such legislation.
Which of these statements is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) 1, 2 and 3
(c) 	2 and 3 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
33. Assertion (A): There has been a growing demand for review of Centre-State relationships.
Reason (R): 	The states have no adequate resources to take up developmental projects.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
34. Which one of the following statements is not correct?
(a) 	No law made by a State legislature shall be treated as unconstitutional if it incidentally touches
upon the jurisdiction provided for under List I or List III.
(b) 	The legislature of a State cannot make a law to regulate “Water”.
(c) 	The law made by Parliament under Article 357 for a State continues its application after the
expiry of President’s rule.
(d) 	Parliament has full power to make law on a residuary matter.
35. Which one of the following is not correct?
(a) 	The executive power of every State shall be so exercised as to ensure compliance with the
laws made by the Parliament
(b) 	Full faith and credit shall be given throughout the territory of India to public acts, records and
judicial proceedings of the Union and of every State.
(c) 	The Governor of a State may entrust to the Government of India any matter to which the
executive power of the State extends.
(d) 	The executive power of the Union extends to the giving of directions to a state to protect the
railways within the State.
36. The division of legislative powers between the Centre and the States under the present Constitu-
tion of India is similar to between the Centre and the Provinces under the Government of India
Act, 1935, in some of the following respects:
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 96] ---
Centre-State Relations | II.21
1. 	In case of overlap of a matter as between the three lists or subjects, predominance in both is
given to the Central legislature.
2. 	In case of repugnancy in the Concurrent field, in both a Central law prevails over a Provincial
or State law.
3. 	In both, residuary powers were vested in the Central legislature.
Which of the above are true?
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 1 and 2
(c) 	1 and 3 	(d) 2 and 3
37. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Source) 	(Tax)
A. 	Tax levied by the Union of India and assigned 	1. 	Income Tax
to the Centre
B. 	Tax levied by the Union of India but assigned 	2. 	Land Revenue
to the States
C. 	Tax levied by the State and assigned to the State 	3. 	Taxes on goods of inter-state trade
D. 	Tax levied by the Union of India and distributed 	4. 	Surcharge
between the Union and the States
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	4 	1 	2 	3
(b) 	2 	3 	4 	1
(c) 	2 	1 	4 	3
(d) 	4 	3 	2 	1
38. Assertion (A): The second Commission on Centre-State relations was constituted by the
Government of India by amending the Constitution of India, and thus a
constitutional status was bestowed on it.
Reason (R): 	Issues like role of Governors, economic and social planning which were a part
of the terms of reference of the Commission are very important issues in the
governance of India.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 97] ---
II.22 | Objective Indian Polity
39. Consider the following statements:
1. 	In extraordinary circumstances, the normal distribution of power between the Centre and the
States is either suspended or the powers of the union parliament are extended over the state
subjects.
2. 	The Indian Constitution vests the residuary power in the Union Parliament and the final
decision as to whether a particular matter falls under the residuary power or not is that of the
Supreme Court.
3. 	The Union Government has the power to give directions to the state governments to ensure
due compliance with Union laws.
4. 	If the Legislatures of two or more states so resolve, Parliament can make laws with respect to
any matter included in the state list relating to those states.
Which of these describe the nature of Indian Federalism?
(a) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(b) 1, 2 and 3
(c) 	2 and 4 	(d) 1 and 3
40. Consider the following statements:
1. 	Sarkaria Commission recommended that the Union Government may persuade the State
Governments for constitution of an All-India Service for education.
2. 	All-India Services are included in the Concurrent List of the Constitution of India.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
1. 	(b) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(b) 	4. 	(d) 	5. 	(a)
6. 	(a) 	7. 	(a) 	8. 	(b) 	9. 	(a) 	10. 	(c)
11. 	(b) 	12. 	(a) 	13. 	(c) 	14. 	(c) 	15. 	(b)
16. 	(d) 	17. 	(d) 	18. 	(a) 	19. 	(c) 	20. 	(c)
21. 	(b) 	22. 	(d) 	23. 	(a) 	24. 	(b) 	25. 	(a)
26. 	(d) 	27. 	(c) 	28. 	(c) 	29. 	(c) 	30. 	(c)
31. 	(d) 	32. 	(a) 	33. 	(a) 	34. 	(b) 	35. 	(c)
36. 	(b) 	37. 	(d) 	38. 	(d) 	39. 	(a) 	40. 	(a)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 98] ---
Inter-State Relations | II.23
Inter-State Relations
Fifteen
1. 	Consider the following statements:
The Constitution of India provides that no law of a State shall impose, or authorise the imposition
of a tax on the sale or purchase of goods where such sale or purchase:
1. 	Takes place even within the territory of the State.
2. 	Takes place in the course of the import of the goods into, or export of the goods out of the
territory of India.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	Parliament may by law provides that neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall
exercise jurisdiction in respect of any dispute with respect to the use, distribution or control
of the waters of any Inter-State river or river valley.
2. 	River Boards Act, 1956, provides for reference of an Inter-State river dispute for arbitration
by a Water Dispute Tribunal.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 99] ---
II.24 | Objective Indian Polity
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
3. 	Which of the following are duties of the Inter-State Council created under Article 263 of the
Constitution of India?
1. 	Inquiring into and advising upon disputes which may have arisen between/among States.
2. 	Investigating and discussing subjects in which some or all of the States, or the Union and one
or more of the States have a common interest.
3. 	Making recommendations upon any such subject for the better coordination of policy and
action with respect to that subject.
4. 	Ensuring that officers belonging to All-India Services posted in various States are not punished
by the judiciary for acts of omission.
Choose the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 1, 2 and 4
(c) 	1, 3 and 4 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
4. 	Consider the following statements on Zonal Councils:
1. 	Zonal Councils were set up under the provisions of the States Reorganisation Act.
2. 	Zonal Councils discuss various issued of common interest in the field of planning, river
waters, inter-state transport.
3. 	They enable the Centre and States to co-operate in evolving uniform policies in social and
economic matters.
4. 	Their decisions are binding on Centre as well as on State governments.
Which of these statements are correct?
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 1, 3 and 4
(c) 	2, 3 and 4 	(d) 1, 2 and 4
5. 	Consider the following statements regarding the constitutional provisions relating to trade, com-
merce and intercourse:
1. 	Parliament may by law impose restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse
between one state and another in the public interest.
2. 	Bills imposing restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse within the state
cannot be moved in the state legislature without the sanction of the Central Government.
3. 	Parliament may enact any law giving or authorizing any discrimination to deal with a situation
arising from the scarcity of goods in any part of Indian Territory.
4. 	Trade and commerce within the state is a subject in the concurrent list.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(b) 3 and 4
(c) 	1 and 3 	(d) 2 only
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 100] ---
Inter-State Relations | II.25
6. 	Who among the following are the members of the Inter-State Council?
(a) 	Chief Ministers of the States/Administrators of the Union Territories.
(b) 	The Prime Minister, all the Chief Ministers of the States/Administrators of the Union
Territories.
(c) 	The Prime Minister, Six Union Cabinet Ministers and all the Chief Ministers of the States/
Administrators of the Union Territories.
(d) 	The Prime Minister, Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha and all the Members of the
Rajya Sabha
7. 	Which one of the following is not correct?
(a) 	The Governor of a State may entrust to the Government of India, functions in relation to
any matter to which the executive power of the state extends.
(b) 	The Governor of a state cannot entrust to the Government of India, functions in relation to
any matter to which the executive power of the state extends unless there is consent of the
Government of India.
(c) 	The orders of Civil Courts are enforceable in the entire country.
(d) 	Full faith and credit has to be given to every public act of every state.
8. 	The Chairman of Zonal Council is:
(a) 	The Chief Minister and is nominated by the Prime Minister of India
(b) 	The Union Minister and is nominated by the President of India
(c) 	The Home Minister and is ex-officio
(d) 	The Vice-President of India
9. 	Assertion (A): Article 301 of 	the Constitution declares trade, commerce and intercourse
throughout the territory of India free.
Reason (R): 	The State can impose taxes which do not directly affect the freedom of trade.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
10. Under which of the following regimes was the Inter-State Council (ISC) set-up?
(a) 	Congress Government in 1975 	(b) Janata Government in 1978
(c) 	Janata Dal-led Government in 1990 	(d) United Front Government in 1996
11. Inter-State water disputes can be resolved by which one of the following?
(a) 	Supreme Court only
(b) 	Union Government only
(c) 	Tribunals established by the Parliament by law
(d) 	Special courts established by the President of India
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 101] ---
II.26 | Objective Indian Polity
12. Which one of the following is the correct statement?
“Full Faith and Credit” clause of the Constitution does not apply to:
(a) 	Public records 	(b) Judicial proceedings
(c) 	Acts of corporations 	(d) Public acts
13. An Inter-State Council may be established by:
(a) 	The Parliament 	(b) The President
(c) 	The National Development Council 	(d) The Zonal Council
14. Which of the following statements on Zonal Councils are correct?
1. 	They owe their existence to the Constitution of India.
2. 	There are five zonal councils.
3. 	They coordinate relations among the governments of the States and Union territories and the
Government of India.
4. 	They are set up under the States Reorganization Act, 1956.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 2, 3 and 4
(c) 	3 and 4 	(d) 2 and 4
1. 	(b) 	2. 	(a) 	3. 	(a) 	4. 	(a) 	5. 	(c)
6. 	(c) 	7. 	(a) 	8. 	(c) 	9. 	(b) 	10. 	(c)
11. 	(c) 	12. 	(c) 	13. 	(b) 	14. 	(b)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 102] ---
Emergency Provisions | II.27
Emergency Provisions
Sixteen
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	No Proclamation of Emergency can be made by the President of India unless the Union
Ministers of Cabinet rank, headed by the Prime Minister, recommended to him, in writing,
that such a Proclamation should be issued.
2. 	The President of India must issue a Proclamation of Revocation of Emergency any time that
the Lok Sabha passes a resolution disapproving the proclamation or its continuance.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	1 only 	(b) 2 only
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Consider the following statements:
If the financial emergency has been declared by the President under the Article 360, then its proc-
lamation:
1. 	May be revoked or varied by a subsequent proclamation
2. 	Shall cease to operate at the expiration of two months, unless before the expiration of that
period it has been approved by the resolution of both Houses of Parliament
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 103] ---
II.28 | Objective Indian Polity
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
3. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	While a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, Article 359 of the Constitution of India
does not come into operation till an order is issued by the President specifying the rights which
are suspended.
2. 	While a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, Article 358 makes the restrictions imposed
by Article 19 non-existent against the state.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
4. 	Which of the following are not necessarily the consequences of the proclamation of the Presi-
dent’s Rule in a State?
1. 	Dissolution of the State Legislative Assembly
2. 	The removal of the Council of Ministers in the State
3. 	Dissolution of the local bodies
4. 	Takeover of the State administration by the Union Government
Choose the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 4 	(b) 1 and 3
(c) 	2 and 3 	(d) 1, 3 and 4
5. 	Consider the following statements:
Proclamation of Emergency under Article 352 of the Constitution of India:
1. 	Requires written communication of the Union Cabinet to the President to that effect.
2. 	Can be issued for the whole of India or part thereof.
3. 	Lapses, if not approved by both Houses of Parliament within a month.
4. 	Requires a resolution, approving the proclamation passed by both Houses of Parliament
only by a majority of the total membership of each House, and not less than 2/3rd members
present and voting.
5. 	Once approved by Parliament can last for six months.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 	1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 	(b) 2, 3 and 4
(c) 	1, 4 and 5 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 5
6. 	In case of declaration of financial emergency:
(a) 	All the State Governments will be dissolved and management of economy will be taken over
by the Union Government
(b) 	All Money Bills of the states will be considered and passed only by the Parliament
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 104] ---
Emergency Provisions | II.29
(c) 	All the State Assemblies will be put under suspended animation and laws on the State List will
be enacted by the Parliament
(d) 	The President may give such directions to the states as may be deemed necessary for economic
recovery and salaries of officials may be temporarily reduced
7. 	Law made by the Parliament with respect to any matter enumerated in State List, during a procla-
mation of national emergency, will cease to have effect in which one of the following conditions?
(a) 	When the proclamation of emergency has ceased to operate
(b) 	When it is repealed by the Parliament
(c) 	On the expiration of six months after the proclamation of emergency has ceased to operate
(d) 	On the expiration of one year after the proclamation of emergency has ceased to operate
8. 	Consider the following statements:
The Supreme Court judgement in S.R. Bommai vs. Union of India has been interpreted to mean
that the Governor can dismiss a Council of Ministers or the Chief Minister:
1. 	At his pleasure on his subjective estimate of the strength of the Chief Minister in the Assembly.
2. 	When the Legislative Assembly has expressed its want of confidence in the Council of
Ministers.
3. 	When a measure of the Council of Ministers has been defeated on the floor of the Assembly.
4. 	When a censure motion against the Council of Ministers has been rejected in the Legislative
Assembly.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	1 and 3 	(d) 3 and 4
9. 	Assertion (A): An imminent danger of war or external aggression is not enough for the
proclamation of emergency.
Reason (R): 	The Proclamation of Emergency shall cease to operate at the expiration of one
month unless approved by both the Houses of Parliament.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
10. Which of the following statements is the correct one?
(a) 	War, external aggression, internal disturbance and armed rebellion are the grounds for
proclaiming emergency.
(b) 	Words “armed rebellion” were replaced by the word “war” by the 44th Amendment.
(c) 	Actual existence of any one or more grounds mentioned in Article 352 is necessary for
proclaiming emergency.
(d) 	The President proclaims emergency on the basis of any ground mentioned in Article 352 or
possibility thereof.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 105] ---
II.30 | Objective Indian Polity
11. If the President of India exercises his power as provided under Article 356 of the Constitution in
respect of a particular State, then:
(a) 	The Assembly of the State is automatically dissolved
(b) 	Article 19 is suspended in that State
(c) 	Parliament assumes the power to legislate on the subjects in the State list
(d) 	The President can make laws relating to that state
12. When a proclamation of emergency is issued by the President under Article 352 of the Constitu-
tion of India:
(a) 	Fundamental Rights are automatically suspended
(b) 	The freedoms under Article 19 are automatically suspended and other Fundamental Rights
can be suspended by an order of the President
(c) 	The freedoms under Article 19 are automatically suspended and other Fundamental Rights,
except those under Articles 20 and 21, can be suspended by an order of the President
(d) 	Only the freedoms under Article 19 are suspended and other Fundamental Rights cannot be
suspended
13. Which one of the following is the correct statement?
Proclamation of Emergency in a State under Article 356 can continue beyond one year if:
(a) 	The High Court of the State certifies that the situation in the State is very serious
(b) 	The Governor of the State certifies that the law and order situation is not under control
(c) 	The Election Commission certifies that it is difficult to hold elections to the Assembly
(d) 	The President is satisfied about the grave situation in the State through independent
investigation
14. Which of the following may be done under conditions of financial emergency?
1. 	Reduction in the number of districts in the country for effecting economy
2. 	Abolition of all State Legislative Assemblies to reduce expenditure
3. 	Reduction in the salaries of the judges of the High Court
4. 	Reservation of Money Bills of State Legislative Assemblies for the consideration of the
President
Choose the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 2, 3 and 4
(c) 	3 and 4 	(d) 1 and 4
15. When a state fails to implement the administrative directions given by the Union under Article 256
of the Constitution of India:
(a) 	Parliament may compel the state to execute the said directions
(b) 	The Governor may dissolve the State Legislature
(c) 	The President may presume that Constitutional machinery in the State has failed
(d) 	The President may impose emergency under Article 352 of the Constitution
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 106] ---
Emergency Provisions | II.31
16. Proclamation of emergency by the President of India can be made on the written advice of the
Cabinet only. This provision has been added:
(a) 	After 44th Constitutional Amendment
(b) 	After 42nd Constitutional Amendment
(c) 	By the Constituent Assembly in the Constitution of India
(d) 	By the Supreme Court of India in 1975
17. The President’s Rule under Article 356 remains valid in a state for the maximum period of:
(a) 	One year 	(b) Two years
(c) 	Three years 	(d) Four years
18. Proclamation of Emergency under Article 352, when Lok Sabha stands dissolved has to be ap-
proved by:
(a) 	Rajya Sabha and then it will continue till the reconstitution of new Lok Sabha, which must
approve it within 30 days of its first sitting.
(b) 	New Lok Sabha within six months of its constitution.
(c) 	Lok Sabha in the next session after six months.
(d) 	Rajya Sabha only.
19. Assertion (A): Proclamation of Emergency can be issued by the President if there is imminent
danger of war or external aggression or armed rebellion.
Reason (R): 	The President can suspend the enforcement of all the fundamental rights during
the period of Emergency.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
20. Which one of the following is not an automatic consequence of the Proclamation of Emergency?
(a) 	Suspension of the enforcement of fundamental rights except those conferred by Articles 20
and 21.
(b) 	Extension of the Union’s executive power to the issue of directions to any State as to the
manner in which its executive power has to be exercised.
(c) 	Extension of the power of Parliament to the making of legislation in regard to items of the
State List
(d) 	Suspension of Article 19.
21. Consider the following statements:
Parliament may make law on a subject enumerated in State List only if the:
1. 	President deems it proper that such law is necessary for all the States.
2. 	Proclamation of Emergency under Article 352 is in operation.
3. 	Lok Sabha passes a resolution by 2/3rd majority of its total membership.
4. 	Governor of the State requests the President for such legislation.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 107] ---
II.32 | Objective Indian Polity
Of these statements:
(a) 	1 and 4 are correct 	(b) 2 alone is correct
(c) 	3 alone is correct 	(d) 3 and 4 are correct
22. The judgement in the S.R. Bommai vs. Union of India case pertained broadly to which Article of
the Constitution of India?
(a) 	Article 29 	(b) Article 32
(c) 	Article 353 	(d) Article 356
23. Consider the following statements in respect of provisions as to financial emergency:
1. 	A proclamation of financial emergency has to be laid before each House of Parliament.
2. 	A proclamation of financial emergency ceases to operate at the expiration of six months,
unless before the expiration of that period, it has been approved by resolutions of both
Houses of Parliament.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
1. 	(c) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(c) 	4. 	(b) 	5. 	(a)
6. 	(d) 	7. 	(c) 	8. 	(b) 	9. 	(d) 	10. 	(d)
11. 	(c) 	12. 	(c) 	13. 	(c) 	14. 	(c) 	15. 	(c)
16. 	(a) 	17. 	(c) 	18. 	(a) 	19. 	(c) 	20. 	(a)
21. 	(b) 	22. 	(d) 	23. 	(a)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 108] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 109] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 110] ---
Central
Government
Three
Seventeen 	President
Eighteen 	Vice-President
Nineteen 	Prime Minister
Twenty 	Central Council of Ministers
Twenty One 	Cabinet Committees
Twenty Two 	Parliament
Twenty Three Parliamentary Committees
Twenty Four 	Parliamentary Forums
Twenty Five 	Supreme Court
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 111] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam