
--- [PDF PAGE 256] ---
Election Commission
Thirty Eight
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	As per provisions of the Constitution of India, a Regional Commissioner shall not be removed
from office except on the recommendation of the Governor of the State where the Regional
Commissioner is posted.
2. 	The number of the Election Commissioners in the Election Commission shall be fixed by the
President from time to time.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Consider the following statements with respect to the Election Commission of India:
1. 	The term of office of the Election Commissioners is same as the Chairman of the Union
Public Service Commission.
2. 	In case of difference of opinion amongst the Chief Election Commissioner and/or other
Election Commissioners, the matter is referred to the President of India.
3. 	Independence of the Election Commission and its insulation from executive interference is
ensured by a special provision under Article 324 of the Constitution of India.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 257] ---
VII.6 | Objective Indian Polity
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 3
(c) 	1 and 3 	(d) 2 and 3
3. 	In the Lok Sabha elections, who among the following can order adjournment of poll or counter-
manding of election on the ground of booth capturing?
(a) 	Chief Election Commissioner
(b) 	Election Commission of India
(c) 	Chief Electoral Officer of the State
(d) 	Returning Officer of the Constituency
4. 	The Chief Election Commissioner of India holds office for a period of
(a) 	Six years
(b) 	During the pleasure of the President
(c) 	For six years or till the age of 65 years, whichever is earlier
(d) 	For five years or till the age of 60 years, whichever is earlier
5. 	An Election Commissioner shall not be removed from office except on the recommendation of
the:
(a) 	President 	(b) Supreme Court
(c) 	Chief Election Commissioner 	(d) Law Minister
6. 	Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Commissions) 	(Created Under Articles)
A. 	The Finance Commission 	1. 	Article 280
B. 	The Commission for Backward Classes 	2. 	Article 340
C. 	The Election Commission 	3. 	Article 324
D. 	The Official Language Commission 	4. 	Article 344
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	1 	4 	3 	2
(b) 	3 	2 	1 	4
(c) 	1 	2 	3 	4
(d) 	3 	4 	1 	2
7. 	Before giving any decision on questions about disqualification of a member of either House of
Parliament, the President of India shall obtain the opinion of which one of the following?
(a) 	Supreme Court 	(b) Election Commission
(c) 	Attorney-General of India 	(d) Solicitor-General of India
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 258] ---
Election Commission | VII.7
8. 	Which one of the following statements is correct?
The Chief Election Commissioner can be removed from office before expiry of his term:
(a) 	In like manner and on like grounds as a member of the Union Public Service Commission
(b) 	In like manner and on like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court
(c) 	On the recommendations of the Supreme Court
(d) 	On the recommendations of the Cabinet
9. 	The President may from time to time fix the number of Election Commissioners of the Election
Commission on the basis of:
(a) 	Advice by the Chief Election Commissioner
(b) 	Advice by the Prime Minister’s Office
(c) 	Recommendation of the Union Law Ministry
(d) 	The law made in that respect by the Parliament
10. The responsibility of preparation of electoral rolls rests with:
(a) 	The Parliament
(b) 	The Local Administration
(c) 	The Election Commission
(d) 	The State Government
1. 	(b) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(b) 	4. 	(c) 	5. 	(c)
6. 	(c) 	7. 	(b) 	8. 	(b) 	9. 	(d) 	10. 	(c)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 259] ---
VII.8 | Objective Indian Polity
Union Public
Service Commission
Thirty Nine
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The President of India is empowered by the Constitution of India to make regulations
specifying the matters on which it is not necessary to consult the Union Public Service
Commission.
2. 	The reasons for non-acceptance of the advice of the Union Public Service Commission have
to be laid before each House of the Parliament.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Which of the following are the functions of the Union Public Service Commission?
1. 	To conduct examinations for recruitment to the services of the Union.
2. 	To advise on matters referred to it by the President or the Governor.
3. 	To advise on all disciplinary matters affecting a government servant.
4. 	To advise on the principles to be followed in respect of promotions and transfers.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 260] ---
Union Public Service Commission 	| VII.9
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 1, 2 and 3
(c) 	1, 3 and 4 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
3. 	Consider the following statements:
A member of the Union Public Service Commission is:
1. 	Debarred from re-appointment as a member
2. 	Ineligible for any other employment under the Central or State Government
3. 	Disqualified from becoming a constitutional functionary like a Governor
Of the above statements:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 are correct
(b) 	2 and 3 are correct
(c) 	1 and 3 are correct
(d) 	1 and 2 are correct
4. 	Assertion (A): The Union Public Service Commission must be consulted as regards the reservation
of posts for Backward classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
Reason (R): 	The functions of the Union Public Service Commission are only advisory and the
Government need not act upon the advice of the Commission in any case.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
5. 	Which of the following statements is not true?
(a) 	A member of the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) holds office for a term of six
years or until he attains the age of 65 years.
(b) 	The Chairperson of UPSC is not eligible for further employment under the Government of
India or Government of any State after retirement.
(c) 	One half of the members of the UPSC should be persons who have held office for at least
10 years either under Government of India or Government of State.
(d) 	The Chairperson and other members of the UPSC are appointed by the Prime Minister.
6. 	Under the Constitution of India, the power to extend functions of the Union Public Service
Commission has been vested in the:
(a) 	President of India
(b) 	Parliament
(c) 	Chairman of the Commission
(d) 	Ministry of Personnel
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 261] ---
VII.10 | Objective Indian Polity
7. 	Who among the following is a Constitutional authority for whose removal from office by the
President a reference to the Supreme Court is necessary?
(a) 	Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission
(b) 	Judge of the Supreme Court
(c) 	Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
(d) 	Chief Election Commissioner
8. 	Which one of the following statements is correct?
(a) 	Union Public Service Commission may serve the needs of a State if requested by the
Governor of that State and approved by the President.
(b) 	Union Public Service Commission may serve the needs of a State if requested by the Chief
Minister of that State.
(c) 	Union Public Service Commission cannot serve the needs of a State.
(d) 	Union Public Service Commission may serve the needs of a State simply on request of
Governor and the approval of the President is not necessary.
9. 	The Constitution of India enjoins upon the government to consult the Union Public Service
Commission in disciplinary matters. Which one of the following is an institution whose emer-
gence cannot exactly be reconciled with the constitutionally prescribed role of the Union Public
Service Commission?
(a) 	The Administrative Reforms Commission
(b) 	The Central Bureau of Investigation
(c) 	The Central Vigilance Commission
(d) 	The Law Commission
10. Which one of the following is not a function of the Union Public Service Commission?
(a) 	It conducts examinations for the appointments to the services of the union.
(b) 	It shall be consulted on all matters relating to methods of recruitment to civil services.
(c) 	It shall be consulted on all disciplinary matters affecting a person serving the Government of
India.
(d) 	It shall be consulted in cases as regards the reservation of posts for Backward Classes,
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
11. Assertion (A): No qualifications have been prescribed for the membership of the Union Public
Service Commission.
Reason (R): 	The Constitution does not fix the number of members of the Union Public
Service Commission.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A.
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A.
(c) 	A is true but R is false.
(d) 	A is false but R is true.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 262] ---
Union Public Service Commission 	| VII.11
12. Which one of the following statements about a member of the Union Public Service Commission
on his ceasing to hold office is incorrect?
(a) 	He is eligible to be appointed as Chairman of the U.P.S.C.
(b) 	He is ineligible to be appointed as Chairman of any State PSC.
(c) 	He is ineligible for employment under the Government of India.
(d) 	He is ineligible for employment under the State Governments.
13. Which of the following does not concern the Union Public Service Commission?
(a) 	Recruitment 	(b) Classification of services
(c) 	Disciplinary matters 	(d) Promotion
14. The annual report of the UPSC is submitted to the:
(a) 	Ministry of Personnel 	(b) Parliament
(c) 	Prime Minister 	(d) President
15. Assertion (A): UPSC is an independent organisation.
Reason (R): 	UPSC is a constitutional body.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
16. Consider the following statements:
A member of the Union Public Service Commission
1. 	Is appointed by the President of India.
2. 	Is ineligible for re-appointment to that office.
3. 	Holds office for a period of 6 years or till the age of 60 years, whichever is earlier.
Of the above statements:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 are correct 	(b) 1 and 2 are correct
(c) 	2 and 3 are correct 	(d) 1 and 3 are correct
17. Who / Which is vested with powers to make regulations as to conditions of service of members
and staff of the Union Public Service Commission?
(a) 	President of India
(b) 	Parliament
(c) 	Union Minister of Law
(d) 	Chairman, Union Public Service Commission
18. Immediately before 26 January, 1950, the Union Public Service Commission was known as:
(a) 	Public Service Commission 	(b) Federal Public Service Commission
(c) 	Central Public Service Commission 	(d) Imperial Public Service Commission
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 263] ---
VII.12 | Objective Indian Polity
19. According to which one of the following Articles of the Constitution of India, is the Government
bound to seek the advice of the UPSC?
(a) 	Article 120 	(b) Article 220
(c) 	Article 320 	(d) Article 420
20. Assertion (A): After being chairman of UPSC, one cannot become a member of Central or State
legislature.
Reason (R): 	He is completely debarred from any future employment under the Central or State
Government after retirement.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
21. In which of the following, does the Union Public Service Commission advise the Central Govern-
ment?
1. 	On matters relating to the methods of recruitment to the civil services.
2. 	On the principles to be followed in making appointments to the civil services.
3. 	On disciplinary matters in respect of persons serving in a civil capacity.
4. 	On seniority cases when referred to it.
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 4 	(b) 2, 3 and 4
(c) 	1, 3 and 4 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
22. In terms of Constitutional status, the Union Public Service Commission is:
(a) 	An Advisory Body
(b) 	A Grievance Redressal Body
(c) 	A body incharge of directing recruitment at State level
(d) 	A body which supervises training of civil servants fit
23. How can functions of the Union Public Service Commission be extended in respect of the servic-
es of the Union and also in respect of the services of any local authority or other body corporate
constituted by law or of any public institution?
(a) 	By the President
(b) 	By the resolution of the Union Government
(c) 	By an Act of Parliament
(d) 	By the Union Home Minister
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 264] ---
Union Public Service Commission 	| VII.13
24. Which one of the following statements is not correct in respect of the Union Public Service Com-
mission?
(a) 	The Constitution of India does not specify the number of Members of the Union Public
Service Commission while it specifies the number in case of the Supreme Court judges.
(b) 	As nearly as may be one-half of the Members of the Union Public Service Commission must
have held office for at least ten years either under the Government of India or under the
Government of a State prior to their joining the Commission.
(c) 	On ceasing to hold office, a Member of the Union Public Service Commission other than the
Chairman is eligible for appointment as the Chairman of a State Public Service Commission.
(d) 	Before creation of a new Group ‘A’ post under the Central Government, a clearance from the
Union Public Service Commission is required.
1. 	(c) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(d) 	4. 	(d) 	5. 	(d)
6. 	(b) 	7. 	(a) 	8. 	(a) 	9. 	(c) 	10. 	(d)
11. 	(b) 	12. 	(b) 	13. 	(b) 	14. 	(d) 	15. 	(a)
16. 	(b) 	17. 	(a) 	18. 	(b) 	19. 	(c) 	20. 	(d)
21. 	(d) 	22. 	(a) 	23. 	(c) 	24. 	(d)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 265] ---
VII.14 | Objective Indian Polity
State Public Service
Commission
Forty
1. 	The State Public Service Commission is consulted on:
1. 	All matters relating to methods of recruitment to civil services and for civil posts in the State.
2. 	All disciplinary matters affecting a person in service under the State.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Consider the following statements:
A member of the State Public Service Commission can be removed only by the:
1. 	Governor on the ground of his misbehaviour
2. 	President on the ground of his infirmity of body or mind
3. 	Governor when such member becomes insolvent
4. 	President on the ground of misbehaviour after receiving report of the Supreme Court after
due enquiry
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 266] ---
State Public Service Commission | VII.15
Which of the above statement(s) is/are correct?
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 2 and 4
(c) 	1 and 3 	(d) 2 alone
3. 	Consider the following statements:
The Constitution provides for the establishment of Public Service Commission:
1. 	For the Union 	2. For each State
3. 	Common for Union Territories 	4. Common for two or more States
Which of these statements are correct?
(a) 	1, 2 and 4 	(b) 1, 2 and 3
(c) 	2 and 3 	(d) 1 and 4
4. 	Assertion (A): It shall be the duty of the State Public Service Commission to conduct examinations
for appointments.
Reason (R): 	The functions of the State Public Service Commission are only advisory and not
obligatory upon the Government to act upon.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
5. 	Which one of the following functions does not require consultation with the State Public Service
Commission as per provisions of the Constitution of India?
(a) 	Methods of recruitment to civil services and civil posts
(b) 	Principles to be followed in making appointments to civil services
(c) 	The manner in which any provision may be made for the reservation of appointments or
posts in favour of any backward class of citizens
(d) 	Any claim for the award of a pension in respect of injuries suffered by a person while serving
under the Government of the State in a civil capacity
6. 	Which one of the following statements is correct?
The Union Public Service Commission may agree to serve all or any of the needs of a State:
(a) 	On request by the Governor of the State
(b) 	On request by the Governor of the State subject to approval of the President of India
(c) 	On request by the Chief Minister of the State
(d) 	Only if Parliament by law, so prescribes
7. 	A Joint Public Service Commission for two or more States can be established by:
(a) 	The concerned States 	(b) An Act of Parliament
(c) 	The Union Public Service Commission 	(d) The Government of India
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 267] ---
VII.16 | Objective Indian Polity
8. 	The State Public Service Commission submits its annual report to the:
(a) 	Parliament 	(b) State Legislature
(c) 	President 	(d) Governor
9. 	When the report of the State Public Service Commission is not accepted, the reasons for such
non-acceptance are to be laid before:
(a) 	Parliament
(b) 	President
(c) 	State Legislature
(d) 	Cabinet Committee presided over by the Chief 	Minister
10. The salaries, allowances and other service conditions of the SPSC members are determined by
the:
(a) 	Governor 	(b) Chief Minister
(c) 	Chairman, SPSC 	(d) State Legislature
11. A member of the State Public Service Commission can be removed on the ground of misbehav-
iour only after an inquiry has been held by:
(a) 	A Joint Parliamentary Committee
(b) 	The Supreme Court of India
(c) 	The High Court of the concerned State
(d) 	A Committee constituted by the Governor of the State
12. Which one of the following is the correct statement?
Parliament may by law provide for the appointment of a Joint State Public Service Commission
to serve the needs of two or more States:
(a) 	When the President deems it to be necessary
(b) 	When the Governors of those States request the Centre to appoint such Commission
(c) 	When a resolution to that effect is passed by the legislatures of those States
(d) 	When the Parliament deems it to be necessary
1. 	(c) 	2. 	(b) 	3. 	(a) 	4. 	(b) 	5. 	(c)
6. 	(b) 	7. 	(b) 	8. 	(d) 	9. 	(c) 	10. 	(a)
11. 	(b) 	12. 	(c)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 268] ---
Finance Commission | VII.17
Finance Commission
Forty One
1. 	On which of the following matters, does the Finance Commission make recommendations to the
President of India?
1. 	The distribution between Union and States of net proceeds of taxes and allocation between
the States of their respective shares of such proceeds.
2. 	The principles which should govern the grants-in-aid of the revenues of the States out of the
Consolidated Fund of India.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Consider the following statements with regard to the Finance Commission:
1. 	The recommendations of the Finance Commission cover a period of five years.
2. 	The Report of the Finance Commission is submitted to the Prime Minister.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 269] ---
VII.18 | Objective Indian Polity
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
3. 	Which one of the following statements about the Finance Commission is not correct?
(a) 	The Commission comprises a Chairman and four other members.
(b) 	The Parliament is authorised to determine by law the qualifications of the members of the
Commission.
(c) 	All the appointments are made by the President of India.
(d) 	All the members have to be from Indian Economic Service or Indian Statistical Service.
4. 	Assertion (A): The Finance Commission prescribes the framework for the working of the
Planning Commission.
Reason (R): 	The jurisdiction and functions of the Finance Commission are outlined in the
Constitution of India.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
5. 	Which of the following is/are the issue(s) on which recommendations to be made by the Finance
Commission to the President of India are specified in the Constitution of India?
1. 	The principles which should govern the grants-in-aid of the revenues of the States out of the
Consolidated Fund of India
2. 	Measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of a State to supplement the resources
of the Panchayats in the State
3. 	Measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of a State to supplement the resources
of the Municipalities in the State
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 2 and 3 only
(c) 	1 only 	(d) 2 only
6. 	Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Finance Commission) 	(Chairman)
A. 	First Finance Commission 	1. P.V. Rajamannar
B. 	Fourth Finance Commission 	2. K.C. Neogy
C. 	Sixth Finance Commission 	3. Y.B. Chavan
D. 	Eighth Finance Commission 	4. Brahamananda Reddy
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 270] ---
Finance Commission | VII.19
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	2 	1 	4 	3
(b) 	4 	3 	2 	1
(c) 	2 	3 	4 	1
(d) 	4 	1 	2 	3
7. 	Which one of the following is not correct about Finance Commission?
(a) 	The members of the Commission are appointed by the President.
(b) 	It is to act as a balancing wheel of Indian fiscal federalism.
(c) 	The qualifications of members of the Commission are determined by the Parliament.
(d) 	It is constituted under the provisions of Article 180 of the Constitution of India.
8. 	The role of the Finance Commission in Centre-State fiscal relations has been undermined by the:
(a) 	State Governments 	(b) Zonal Councils
(c) 	Planning Commission 	(d) Central Government
9. 	Assertion (A): The qualifications which shall be requisite for appointment as the members of the
Finance Commission are distinctly stated in the Constitution of India.
Reason (R): 	Finance Commission is constituted under Article 280 of the Constitution of
India.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
10. The Finance Commission recommends the distribution of the net proceeds of the Union Gov-
ernment arising from:
(a) 	All taxes between the Union and the States
(b) 	Specified taxes among the States only
(c) 	All sources including taxes, fees and surcharges between the Union and the States
(d) 	Specified taxes without the surcharge between the Union and the States
11. The principles concerning the provisions of the grants-in-aid to the States out of the Consoli-
dated Fund of India are recommended by the:
(a) 	Planning Commission
(b) 	Administrative Reforms Commission
(c) 	Finance Commission
(d) 	Public Accounts Committee
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 271] ---
VII.20 | Objective Indian Polity
12. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Bodies) 	(Articles)
A. 	Finance Commission 	1. 	Article 148
B. 	Union Public Service Commission 	2. 	Article 280
C. 	Election Commission 	3. 	Article 315
D. 	Comptroller and Auditor-General of India 	4. 	Article 324
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	4 	1 	2 	3
(b) 	2 	3 	4 	1
(c) 	4 	3 	2 	1
(d) 	2 	1 	4 	3
13. The Finance Commission is constituted to recommend criteria for:
(a) 	Framing a financial bill
(b) 	Preparing the annual budget of Union Government
(c) 	Distribution of financial resources between Union and the States
(d) 	Auditing the receipts and expenditures of the Union Government
14. Consider the following statements:
The Finance Commission makes recommendation to the President in respect of:
1. 	The distribution of net proceeds of taxes to be shared between the Union and the States
2. 	Assessment of natural, capital and human resources
3. 	The principles governing grants-in-aid to the States
4. 	Any other matter concerning financial relations between the Union and the States
Of these statements:
(a) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 are correct
(b) 	2 and 4 are correct
(c) 	1, 3 and 4 are correct
(d) 	1, 2 and 3 are correct
15. The qualifications for the members of Finance Commission:
(a) 	Are laid down in the Constitution of India
(b) 	Can be prescribed by the Parliament of India
(c) 	Can be prescribed by the President of India
(d) 	Can be prescribed by the Union Finance Minister
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 272] ---
Finance Commission | VII.21
16. Consider the following statements about the Finance Commission:
1. 	The duty of the Finance Commission is to make recommendations as to the distribution of
revenue resources between the Union and the States.
2. 	It is appointed every fifth year by the President of India.
3. 	It raises revenue for central financial transfers to the States.
4. 	It borrows money from the market for central grants to the States.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 1, 2 and 3
(c) 	1 only 	(d) 2 and 4
17. Statement I: 	The Finance Commission depends mainly on the data and information of the
financial needs of the states, supplied by the states themselves.
Statement II: This information and data may not be free from the hidden unrealities; and an
attempt to secure more financial assistance and window dressing of the financial
position of the states cannot be ruled out.
Codes:
(a) 	Both the statements are individually true and Statement II is the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(b) 	Both the statements are individually true but Statement II is not the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(c) 	Statement I is true but Statement II is false.
(d) 	Statement I is false but Statement II is true.
18. Which one among the following is the function of the Finance Commission?
(a) 	Preparation of the Central Budget
(b) 	Assessing income tax proceeds
(c) 	Determining the principles governing grants-in-aid the states
(d) 	Exercising control over Government expenditure
19. Which of the following is/are the functions of the Finance Commission?
1. 	Making recommendations as to the principles governing grants-in-aid of the revenues of the
States.
2. 	To suggest measures to augment the Consolidated Fund of India.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
20. In which Article of our Constitution, is the Finance Commission dealt with?
(a) 	Article 280 	(b) Article 380
(c) 	Article 281 	(d) Article 381
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 273] ---
VII.22 | Objective Indian Polity
21. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Function) 	(Authority)
A. 	Principles governing grants- 	1. 	President of India
in-aid to states
B. 	Coordination in the Central Secretariat 	2. 	Chief Minister
C. 	Appointment of High Court Judges 	3. 	Finance Commission
D. 	Alternative Expenditure Policy 	4. 	Cabinet Secretary
5. 	Estimates Committee
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	1 	5 	2 	4
(b) 	3 	4 	1 	5
(c) 	1 	4 	2 	5
(d) 	3 	5 	1 	4
1. 	(c) 	2. 	(a) 	3. 	(d) 	4. 	(d) 	5. 	(a)
6. 	(a) 	7. 	(d) 	8. 	(c) 	9. 	(d) 	10. 	(d)
11. 	(c) 	12. 	(b) 	13. 	(c) 	14. 	(c) 	15. 	(b)
16. 	(a) 	17. 	(b) 	18. 	(c) 	19. 	(a) 	20. 	(a)
21. 	(b)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 274] ---
National Commission for SCs | VII.23
National Commission for SCs
Forty Two
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The first National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes was constituted in
the year 1992.
2. 	The first National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes was constituted
under the Constitution (Sixty-fifth Amendment) Act.
3. 	The 87th Amendment bifurcated the combined National Commission for Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes into two separate bodies.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	1 and 3 	(d) 1, 2 and 3
2. 	Which of the following were created under the provisions of the Constitution of India?
1. 	National Development Council
2. 	Finance Commission
3. 	National Commission for Scheduled Castes
4. 	Commission to investigate the conditions of Backward Classes
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 275] ---
VII.24 | Objective Indian Polity
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(b) 1, 2 and 3 only
(c) 	2, 3 and 4 only 	(d) 1 and 4 only
3. 	Who of the following places the annual report of the National Commission for SCs before the
Parliament?
(a) 	Union Minister for Social Justice 	(b) Union Cabinet
(c) 	Prime Minister of India 	(d) President of India
4. 	Which Article of the Constitution of India deals with the National Commission for SCs?
(a) 	Article 336 	(b) Article 337
(c) 	Article 338 	(d) Article 338-A
5. 	The National Commission for SCs consists of a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and:
(a) 	Two other members 	(b) Three other members
(c) 	Four other members 	(d) Five other members
6. 	The separate National Commission for SCs came into existence in:
(a) 	2000 	(b) 2002
(c) 	2004 	(d) 2006
7. 	The conditions of service of the members of the National Commission for SCs are determined
by the:
(a) 	Parliament of India 	(b) President of India
(c) 	Union Cabinet 	(d) Constitution of India
1. 	(a) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(d) 	4. 	(c) 	5. 	(b)
6. 	(c) 	7. 	(b)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 276] ---
National Commission for STs | VII.25
National Commission for STs
Forty Three
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The National Commission for Scheduled Tribes was constituted under the Constitution
(Eighty-ninth Amendment) Act.
2. 	The first National Commission for Scheduled Tribes was constituted in 2006.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Which one of the following is a Constitutional Body?
(a) 	National Commission for Scheduled Tribes
(b) 	National Commission for Minorities
(c) 	National Commission for Women
(d) 	Planning Commission
3. 	The National Commission for STs submits its annual report to the:
(a) 	Parliament of India 	(b) Union Cabinet
(c) 	Ministry of Tribal Affairs 	(d) President of India
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 277] ---
VII.26 | Objective Indian Polity
4. 	Which Article of the Constitution of India deals with the National Commission for STs?
(a) 	Article 338-A 	(b) Article 339
(c) 	Article 334 	(d) Article 338
5. 	The members of the National Commission for STs are appointed by the:
(a) 	Cabinet Committee on Appointments 	(b) Parliament of India
(c) 	President of India 	(d) Minister for Tribal Affairs
6. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The National Commission for STs presents an annual report to the Parliament.
2. 	The central government and state governments are required to consult the National
Commission for STs on all major policy matters affecting the STs.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
7. 	Statement I: 	The National Commission for STs is vested with the power to regulate its own
procedure.
Statement II: The National Commission for STs, while investigating any matter or inquiring
into any complaint, has all the powers of a civil court.
Codes:
(a) 	Both the statements are individually true and Statement II is the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(b) 	Both the statements are individually true but Statement II is not the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(c) 	Statement I is true but Statement II is false.
(d) 	Statement I is false but Statement II is true.
1. 	(a) 	2. 	(a) 	3. 	(d) 	4. 	(a) 	5. 	(c)
6. 	(b) 	7. 	(b)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 278] ---
Special Officer for Linguistic Minorities | VII.27
Special Officer for
Linguistic Minorities
Forty Four
1. 	Which of the following committees / commissions recommended the establishment of the office
of the Special Officer for Linguistic Minorities?
(a) 	Administrative Reforms Commission 	(b) Swaran Singh Committee
(c) 	States Reorganisation Commission 	(d) Rajamannar Committee
2. 	The Commissioner for Linguistic Minorities submits his annual reports and other reports to the:
(a) 	National Commission for Minorities 	(b) Parliament of India
(c) 	President of India 	(d) Union Cabinet
3. 	The Article of the Constitution of India containing the provision for the Special Officer for Lin-
guistic Minorities is:
(a) 	Article 350-A 	(b) Article 351
(c) 	Article 350 	(d) Article 350-B
4. 	At the central level, the Commissioner for Linguistic Minorities falls under the
(a) 	Ministry of Tribal Affairs 	(b) Ministry of Home Affairs
(c) 	Ministry of Social Justice 	(d) Ministry of Minority Affairs
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 279] ---
VII.28 | Objective Indian Polity
5. 	The office of the Special Officer for Linguistic Minorities was created in:
(a) 	1957 	(b) 1956
(c) 	1964 	(d) 1969
6. 	Who / which of the following appoints the Special Officer for Linguistic Minorities?
(a) 	Cabinet Committee on Appointments
(b) 	President of India
(c) 	Speaker of the Lok Sabha
(d) 	Chairman of the National Minorities Commission
7. 	The headquarters of the Commissioner for Linguistic Minorities is located at:
(a) 	Kolkata 	(b) New Delhi
(c) 	Allahabad 	(d) Lucknow
8. 	Which of the following Constitutional Amendment Acts made a provision for the Special Officer
for Linguistic Minorities?
(a) 	Fourth Amendment Act 	(b) Seventh Amendment Act
(c) 	Thirteenth Amendment Act 	(d) Fifteenth Amendment Act
1. 	(c) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(d) 	4. 	(d) 	5. 	(a)
6. 	(b) 	7. 	(c) 	8. 	(b)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 280] ---
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India | VII.29
Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India
Forty Five
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India has no control over the issue of money from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
2. 	The term of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been fixed by an
Act enacted by Parliament.
Which of the statement(s) given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Which of the following statements regarding the Comptroller and Auditor General of India is /
are true?
The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India:
1. 	Can be considered by the joint session of both Houses of Parliament
2. 	Includes examination of income and expenditure of all public sector undertakings
3. 	Is placed before the Lok Sabha with the comments of the Estimates Committee
4. 	Constitutes the basis for scrutiny by the Public Accounts Committee of the Parliament
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 281] ---
VII.30 | Objective Indian Polity
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 1 and 3
(c) 	2 and 4 	(d) Only 4
3. 	Which one of the following statements is not correct with regard to the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India (CAG)?
(a) 	The CAG has been awarded a fully independent status.
(b) 	The CAG can only be removed on the recommendation of the President.
(c) 	The salary and emoluments of the CAG are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.
(d) 	The tenure of CAG is fixed for six years.
4. 	Who/Which among the following performs the watchdog functions in the financial management
in the Government of India?
1. 	The Controller General of Accounts
2. 	The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
3. 	The Public Accounts Committee
4. 	The Finance Minister
Choose the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	Only 3 	(d) 1 and 4
5. 	Which one of the following statements is not correct regarding the functions and powers of the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India?
(a) 	He examines the accounts of the Union Government and submits his report to the President.
(b) 	He examines the accounts of the State Governments and submits his report to the Governors
of the respective States.
(c) 	He does not exercise any administrative control over the offices of the auditors working in
the States.
(d) 	In case either House of Parliament desires to have any information from him, it can do so
through the Public Accounts Committee.
6. 	Which one of the following statements about Comptroller and Auditor-General of India is not
correct?
(a) 	No minister can represent him in the Parliament.
(b) 	His salary and emoluments are chargeable on the Consolidated Fund of India.
(c) 	He cannot disallow any expenditure which in his opinion violates the Constitution.
(d) 	He has been debarred from holding any office of profit under the Union or State Governments
after his retirement.
7. 	The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India submits his audit reports to the:
(a) 	Prime Minister 	(b) Parliament
(c) 	President 	(d) Chief Justice of India
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 282] ---
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India | VII.31
8. 	Assertion (A): The salary and conditions of service of the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India cannot be varied to his disadvantage after he is appointed.
Reason (R): 	The office of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India is a constitutional
office.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
9. 	Consider the following statements:
All the Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India:
1. 	Relating to accounts of the Union and accounts of States are submitted to the President of
India
2. 	Relating to accounts of a State are submitted to the Governor of the State
3. 	Relating to accounts of States are submitted to the Union Minister of Finance
Which of the statements given above is correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Only 3 	(d) None
10. The ultimate responsibility of taking due action on the comments of the Comptroller and Audi-
tor-General of India vests with the:
(a) 	President of India
(b) 	Supreme Court
(c) 	Parliament
(d) 	National Development Council
11. Consider the following statements:
The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India has to:
1. 	Audit government expenditure
2. 	Make financial policy
3. 	Sanction grants to various departments
4. 	See that public expenditure are in conformity with the government rules
Of these statements:
(a) 	2, 3 and 4 are correct 	(b) 1 and 3 are correct
(c) 	2 and 3 are correct 	(d) 1 and 4 are correct
12. Who among the following can only be removed from the office in like manner and on the like
grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court?
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 283] ---
VII.32 | Objective Indian Polity
1. 	Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
2. 	Chief Election Commissioner
3. 	Chairman, Union Public Service Commission
4. 	Attorney General for India
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(b) 1, 2 and 4 only
(c) 	1 and 2 only 	(d) 2 and 3 only
13. The annual report of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India is scrutinised in detail by the:
(a) 	Public Accounts Committee
(b) 	Estimates Committee
(c) 	Consultative Committee of the Finance Ministry
(d) 	Select Committee on Expenditure
14. Which one of the following is not correct regarding the Comptroller and Auditor-General (CAG)
of India?
(a) 	His salary and other service conditions are determined by the Parliament.
(b) 	He shall take an oath before the President.
(c) 	He may also take an oath before any other person appointed for that purpose by the President.
(d) 	He can be removed on the grounds as in case of a Judge of High Court.
15. The provisions of the Act relating to the duties of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
are to audit and report on all the expenditure from which of the following?
1. 	Consolidated Fund of India
2. 	Consolidated Fund of each State
3. 	Contingency Fund of India
4. 	Public Account of India
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(b) 1, 2 and 3, only
(c) 	2, 3 and 4, only 	(d) 1, 3 and 4, only
16. Which of the following fall within the duties of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India?
1. 	To audit and report on the receipts and expenditure of all bodies and authorities substantially
financed from the Union or State revenues.
2. 	To audit the receipts and expenditure of each State to satisfy himself that the rules and
procedures in that behalf are designed to secure an effective check on the assessment,
collection and proper allocation of revenue.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 284] ---
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India | VII.33
17. In prescribing the form in which the accounts of the Union and the states are to be kept, the
Comptroller and Auditor-General is expected to take approval of the:
(a) 	Parliament
(b) 	Legislature of the state concerned and the Parliament
(c) 	Finance Minister
(d) 	The President of India
18. Statement I: 	Financial accountability of the Union Government to Parliament is ensured
through the reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
Statement II: The Comptroller and Auditor-General has to submit the report to the President
who causes it to be laid before the Lok Sabha.
Codes:
(a) 	Both the statements are individually true and Statement II is the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(b) 	Both the statements are individually true but Statement II is not the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(c) 	Statement I is true but Statement II is false.
(d) 	Statement I is false but Statement II is true.
19. The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India submits three reports to the Parliament/State
Legislatures. Which one of the following reports does not come under that category?
(a) 	Audit Report on Finance Accounts
(b) 	Audit Report on Appropriation Accounts
(c) 	Audit Report on Capital Accounts
(d) 	Audit Report on Commercial and Public Sector Enterprises
20. The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India has the power to audit which of the following?
1. 	All expenditure from the Contingency Fund and the Public Account of the Union
2. 	All expenditure from the Contingency Fund and the Public Account of a State.
3. 	All expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of each Union Territory having a Legislative
Assembly of its own.
4. 	Accounts of all government companies set up under the Indian Companies Act.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2, 3 and 4
(b) 	Only 1 and 2
(c) 	Only 3 and 4
(d) 	Only 1, 2 and 3
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 285] ---
VII.34 | Objective Indian Polity
1. 	(c) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(b) 	4. 	(b) 	5. 	(c)
6. 	(c) 	7. 	(c) 	8. 	(a) 	9. 	(b) 	10. 	(c)
11. 	(d) 	12. 	(c) 	13. 	(a) 	14. 	(d) 	15. 	(a)
16. 	(c) 	17. 	(d) 	18. 	(a) 	19. 	(c) 	20. 	(a)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 286] ---
Attorney General of India | VII.35
Attorney General of India
Forty Six
1. 	Which one of the following statements is correct with regard to the office of the Attorney Gen-
eral of India?
(a) 	He shall have the right of audience in all the Courts within the territory of India.
(b) 	He shall perform his duties only in the Supreme Court.
(c) 	He enjoys a fixed tenure.
(d) 	The President appoints a person who is qualified to be a judge of a High Court, to be the
Attorney General of India.
2. 	Who is the first Law Officer of the Government of India?
(a) 	Chief Justice of India 	(b) Union Law Minister
(c) 	Attorney General of India 	(d) Law Secretary
3. 	Who among the following holds his office at the pleasure of the President?
(a) 	Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission
(b) 	Attorney General of India
(c) 	Speaker of the Lok Sabha
(d) 	Comptroller and Auditor General of India
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 287] ---
VII.36 | Objective Indian Polity
4. 	Who among the following can attend the meetings of both Houses of Parliament while being not
a member of either of the Houses?
(a) 	Solicitor-General of India 	(b) Vice-President of India
(c) 	Comptroller and Auditor-General of India (d) Attorney General of India
5. 	Which Article of the Constitution of India has provided for the office of the Attorney General
of India?
(a) 	Article 76 	(b) Article 74
(c) 	Article 78 	(d) Article 77
6. 	The remuneration of the Attorney General of India is determined by:
(a) 	Parliament of India 	(b) President of India
(c) 	Prime Minister of India 	(d) Union Cabinet
7. 	The Solicitor General of India provides assistance to the:
(a) 	Union Law Secretary 	(b) Chief Justice of India
(c) 	Union Law Minister 	(d) Attorney General of India
1. 	(a) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(b) 	4. 	(d) 	5. 	(a)
6. 	(b) 	7. 	(d)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 288] ---
Advocate General of the State | VII.37
Advocate General of the State
Forty Seven
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	Like the Judge of a High Court, the Advocate-General of a State is appointed by the President
of India.
2. 	A person who is qualified to be appointed a judge of a High Court, can be appointed as
Advocate General.
Which of the statement(s) given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Consider the following statements with regard to the Advocate General of a State:
1. 	He holds office during the pleasure of the President of India.
2. 	He can take part in the proceedings of the State Legislative Assembly.
3. 	His salary is paid from the Consolidated Fund of India.
4. 	He advises the State Government on legal matters.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 289] ---
VII.38 | Objective Indian Polity
Which of these is/are correct?
(a) 	2 and 4 	(b) Only 3
(c) 	Only 1 	(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
3. 	The Advocate General of a State enjoys all the privileges and immunities that are available to:
(a) 	A member of the State Legislature 	(b) A member of the Parliament of India
(c) 	Governor of the State 	(d) President of India
4. 	Which Article of the Constitution of India has provided for the office of the Advocate General
of the States?
(a) 	Article 163 	(b) Article 168
(c) 	Article 165 	(d) Article 169
5. 	The term of office of the Advocate General of a State is:
(a) 	4 years 	(b) 5 years
(c) 	6 years 	(d) Not fixed
6. 	The remuneration of the Advocate General of a State is determined by:
(a) 	President of India 	(b) State Legislature
(c) 	State Governor 	(d) Parliament of India
1. 	(b) 	2. 	(a) 	3. 	(a) 	4. 	(c) 	5. 	(d)
6. 	(c)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 290] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 291] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 292] ---
Non-Constitutional
Bodies
Eight
Forty Eight 	Planning Commission
Forty Nine 	National Development Council
Fifty 	National Human Rights Commission
Fifty One 	State Human Rights Commission
Fifty Two 	Central Information Commission
Fifty Three 	State Information Commission
Fifty Four 	Central Vigilance Commission
Fifty Five 	Central Bureau of Investigation
Fifty Six 	Lokpal and Lokayuktas
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 293] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 294] ---
Planning Commission
Forty Eight
1. 	The Planning Commission was established immediately after the inauguration of the Constitution
to:
1. 	Determine the machinery for implementing the Directive Principles
2. 	Assess national resources and plan for their effective and balanced use
3. 	Lay down the conditions for government participation in agriculture and industry
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	1 and 2 	(d) 2 and 3
2. 	Which of the following is/are correct regarding the Planning Commission?
1. 	Deputy Chairman has always been a whole-time member.
2. 	Some Union Cabinet Ministers have been part-time members.
3. 	Members of the Planning Commission enjoy the status of a Cabinet Minister.
4. 	Number of whole-time expert members has varied.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 295] ---
VIII.6 | Objective Indian Polity
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	2 and 4 	(b) Only 4
(c) 	1 and 3 	(d) 1, 2 and 4
3. 	Which one of the following statements is not correct in regard to the functions performed by the
Planning Commission?
(a) 	It makes an assessment of the material, economic and human resources of the country.
(b) 	It makes recommendations to the President of India with regard to distribution of proceeds
of taxes between the Union and the States.
(c) 	It formulates plans for the most effective and balanced utilisation of country’s resources.
(d) 	It appraises from time to time the progress made in the execution of each stage of the plan
and recommends adjustments in policy and measures which it deems necessary.
4. 	The Planning Commission is:
(a) 	A line agency 	(b) An auxiliary agency
(c) 	A constitutional agency 	(d) A staff agency
5. 	“Planning has superseded the Federation and our country is functioning like a unitary system in
many respects” – was stated by:
(a) 	Ashok Chanda 	(b) K. Santhanam
(c) 	Estimates Committee 	(d) Administrative Reforms Commission
6. 	Which one of the following agencies does not have statutory oversight over public expenditure?
(a) 	The Parliament 	(b) The Planning Commission
(c) 	The Comptroller and Auditor-General 	(d) The Finance Ministry
7. 	Which one of the following is not a function of the Planning Commission?
(a) 	Formulation of a plan
(b) 	Execution of development plans
(c) 	Appraisal of plan progress
(d) 	Making recommendations on policy and administration
8. 	The Planning Commission was set up:
(a) 	Under the Government of India Act, 1935
(b) 	As per the provisions of the Constitution of India
(c) 	By a Cabinet Resolution
(d) 	As per the recommendations of the National Development Council
9. 	The role of the Finance Commission in Centre-State fiscal relations has been undermined by:
(a) 	The State Governments
(b) 	The Zonal Councils
(c) 	The Planning Commission
(d) 	The Election Commission
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 296] ---
Planning Commission | VIII.7
10. Which one of the following statements about the Planning Commission is true?
(a) 	It is a constitutional body.
(b) 	It is a statutory body.
(c) 	It has been created by an executive order.
(d) 	It is quasi-judicial in character.
11. Which one of the following is not correct?
(a) 	The Planning Commission prepares the plan in consultation with Union Ministries and State
Governments.
(b) 	The various Central Ministries and State Governments draw up their own plans according to
their needs, irrespective of the allocation received.
(c) 	An effort is made through negotiation and discussion to secure agreement among the Central
Ministries and State Governments regarding planning.
(d) 	The draft five year plan prepared by the Planning Commission is placed before the Parliament
for its sanction.
1. 	(b) 	2. 	(d) 	3. 	(b) 	4. 	(d) 	5. 	(b)
6. 	(b) 	7. 	(b) 	8. 	(c) 	9. 	(c) 	10. 	(c)
11. 	(b)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 297] ---
VIII.8 | Objective Indian Polity
National Development Council
Forty Nine
1. 	Consider the following functions:
1. 	Prescribing guidelines for preparation of the National Plan
2. 	Reviewing periodically the working of the National Plan
3. 	Recommending measures for the achievement of the aims and targets set out in the National
Plan
4. 	Assessing the material, capital and human resources of the country
Which of these are the functions of the National Development Council?
(a) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(b) 1 and 4
(c) 	1, 2 and 3 	(d) 2, 3 and 4
2. 	The National Development Council was set up as per:
(a) 	The Government of India Act, 1935
(b) 	The recommendations of the Finance Commission
(c) 	The provisions of the Indian Constitution
(d) 	The recommendations of the Planning Commission
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 298] ---
National Development Council | VIII.9
3. 	What is the objective of the National Development Council?
(a) 	To approve the Five-Year Plan made by the Planning Commission with inputs from the
Union and the State Governments.
(b) 	To settle economic disputes among the Union and the State Governments.
(c) 	To settle inter-ministerial disputes in the Union Government.
(d) 	To settle inter-ministerial disputes in the State Governments.
4. 	The highest policy-making body in matters relating to National Planning is the:
(a) 	Planning Commission 	(b) Finance Commission
(c) 	Inter-State Council 	(d) National Development Council
5. 	Assertion (A): The National Development Council was constituted to secure the cooperation of
States in the execution of the plan.
Reason (R): 	The Planning Commission is primarily an expert body without representatives
from State Governments.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) 	A is true but R is false
(d) 	A is false but R is true
6. 	Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List-I 	List-II
(Bodies) 	(Functions)
A. 	The Finance Commission 	1. 	Plan Grants
B. 	The National Development Council 	2. 	Certificate of Net Proceeds
C. 	The Planning Commission 	3. 	Common Economic Policies
D. 	The C&AG 	4. 	Allocation of I.T. Proceeds
Codes:
A 	B 	C 	D
(a) 	2 	1 	4 	3
(b) 	4 	3 	1 	2
(c) 	3 	4 	2 	1
(d) 	2 	1 	3 	4
7. 	For which one of the following, has a provision not been explicitly stated in the Constitution of
India?
(a) 	Inter-State Council 	(b) All India Services
(c) 	Contingency Fund of India 	(d) National Development Council
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 299] ---
VIII.10 | Objective Indian Polity
8. 	Which one of the following is the first and foremost function of the National Development Coun-
cil?
(a) 	To effect co-operation of efforts between the Union executive and the bureaucracy.
(b) 	To effect co-operation of efforts between the Union executive and the Parliament.
(c) 	To achieve the targets of the plan and to promote administrative efficiency.
(d) 	To effect co-ordination of plan efforts among the Union Government, the Planning
Commission and the State Governments.
1. 	(c) 	2. 	(d) 	3. 	(a) 	4. 	(d) 	5. 	(a)
6. 	(b) 	7. 	(d) 	8. 	(d)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 300] ---
National Human Rights Commission | VIII.11
National Human Rights
Commission
Fifty
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The National Human Rights Commission is the watchdog of human rights in the country.
2. 	The National Human Rights Commission is an independent body.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	The chairman and members of the National Human Rights Commission are appointed on the
recommendations of a committee consisting of:
1. 	Speaker of the Lok Sabha
2. 	Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha
3. 	Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha
4. 	Leader of the Opposition in the Rajya Sabha
5. 	Prime Minister
6. 	Union Home Minister
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 301] ---
VIII.12 | Objective Indian Polity
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 3, 5 and 6 	(b) 1, 2 and 5
(c) 	1, 3, 4 and 5 	(d) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6
3. 	The ex-officio members of the National Human Rights Commission are:
1. 	Chairman of the National Commission for Minorities
2. 	Chairman of the National Commission for SCs
3. 	Chairman of the National Commission for STs
4. 	Chairman of the National Commission for Women
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 2, 3 and 4
(c) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(d) 1, 2 and 4
4. 	Who among the following can be the Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission?
(a) 	Only a retired Chief Justice of a High Court
(b) 	Only a retired Chief Justice of India
(c) 	Any serving judge of the High Court
(d) 	Any serving judge of the Supreme Court
5. 	In which year was the Human Rights Protection Law passed in India?
(a) 	1986 	(b) 1987
(c) 	1993 	(d) 1995
6. 	The salaries, allowances and other service conditions of the members of the National Human
Rights Commission are determined by the:
(a) 	President of India 	(b) Parliament of India
(c) 	Chairman, NHRC 	(d) Central Government
7. 	The National Human Rights Commission consists of a chairman and:
(a) 	Three members 	(b) Four members
(c) 	Five members 	(d) Six members
8. 	The chairman of the National Human Rights Commission holds office for:
(a) 	5 years or until the age of 65 years, whichever is earlier.
(b) 	6 years or until the age of 65 years, whichever is earlier.
(c) 	5 years or until the age of 70 years, whichever is earlier.
(d) 	6 years or until the age of 70 years, whichever is earlier.
9. 	Which of the following provided for the establishment of the National Human Rights Commis-
sion?
(a) 	A resolution of the Parliament 	(b) A resolution of the Union Cabinet
(c) 	An order of the Supreme Court 	(d) An Act of the Parliament
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 302] ---
National Human Rights Commission | VIII.13
10. Consider the following statements:
1. 	The National Human Rights Commission is not a constitutional body.
2. 	The National Human Rights Commission is a statutory body.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
1. 	(c) 	2. 	(d) 	3. 	(c) 	4. 	(b) 	5. 	(c)
6. 	(d) 	7. 	(b) 	8. 	(c) 	9. 	(d) 	10. 	(c)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 303] ---
VIII.14 | Objective Indian Polity
State Human Rights
Commission
Fifty One
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The State Human Rights Commission is a multi-member body.
2. 	The State Human Rights Commission consists of a chairperson and three members.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	The Protection of Human Rights Act of 1993 provides for the creation of:
(a) 	National Human Rights Commission
(b) 	State Human Rights Commission
(c) 	Joint State Human Rights Commission
(d) 	Human Rights Courts
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 2 	(b) 1, 2 and 4
(c) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(d) 1, 2 and 3
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 304] ---
State Human Rights Commission | VIII.15
3. 	The chairperson of a State Human Rights Commission can be removed by the:
(a) 	Governor of the State 	(b) President of India
(c) 	Parliament of India 	(d) State Legislature
4. 	A State Human Rights Commission submits its annual report to the:
(a) 	State Legislature 	(b) Governor of the State
(c) 	State Government 	(d) High Court of the State
5. 	A member of a State Human Rights Commission holds office for:
(a) 	5 years or until the age of 70 years, whichever is earlier.
(b) 	5 years or until the age of 65 years, whichever is earlier.
(c) 	6 years or until the age of 70 years, whichever is earlier.
(d) 	6 years or until the age of 65 years, whichever is earlier.
6. 	Who among the following can be the chairperson of a State Human Rights Commission?
(a) 	Only a retired Chief Justice of India
(b) 	Any serving judge of the Supreme Court
(c) 	Any serving judge of a High Court
(d) 	Only a retired Chief Justice of a High Court
7. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The functions of a State Human Rights Commission are mainly recommendatory in nature.
2. 	The recommendations of a State Human Rights Commission are binding on the State
Government.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
1. 	(a) 	2. 	(b) 	3. 	(b) 	4. 	(c) 	5. 	(a)
6. 	(d) 	7. 	(a)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 305] ---
VIII.16 | Objective Indian Polity
Central Information
Commission
Fifty Two
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Central Information Commission can order inquiry into any matter if there are reasonable
grounds.
2. 	The Central Information Commission has the power to secure compliance of its decisions
from the public authority.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Who among the following are members of a committee that recommends the appointment of the
Chief Information Commissioner?
1. 	Prime Minister
2. 	Leader of opposition in the Lok Sabha
3. 	Leader of opposition in the Rajya Sabha
4. 	Union Cabinet Minister nominated by the Prime Minister
5. 	Speaker of the Lok Sabha
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 306] ---
Central Information Commission | VIII.17
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 4 	(b) 1, 2, 3 and 5
(c) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(d) 1, 2 and 5
3. 	The Central Information Commission entertains complaints and appeals pertaining to offices,
financial institutions and public sector undertakings under the:
1. 	Central government
2. 	State government
3. 	Local government
4. 	Union territories
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 4 	(b) Only 1
(c) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(d) 1, 2 and 3
4. 	The salary, allowances and other service conditions of the Chief Information Commissioner are
similar to those of:
(a) 	A judge of the Supreme Court 	(b) The chairman of the UPSC
(c) 	The Chief Election Commissioner 	(d) The Central Vigilance Commissioner
5. 	The Central Information Commission submits its annual report to the:
(a) 	President 	(b) Parliament
(c) 	Supreme Court 	(d) Central Government
6. 	An Information Commissioner can be removed from the office by the President on the advise /
recommendation of the:
(a) 	Supreme Court 	(b) Parliament
(c) 	Central Vigilance Commission 	(d) Union Public Service Commission
7. 	The Central Information Commission was established in:
(a) 	2000 	(b) 2002
(c) 	2005 	(d) 2006
8. 	The Central Information Commission consists of a Chief Information Commissioner and not
more than:
(a) 	Five Information Commissioners 	(b) Ten Information Commissioners
(c) 	Six Information Commissioners 	(d) Eight Information Commissioners
9. 	What is the term of office of the Chief Information Commissioner and an Information Commis-
sioner?
(a) 	4 years 	(b) 5 years
(c) 	6 years 	(d) Not fixed
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 307] ---
VIII.18 | Objective Indian Polity
10. Which of the following provided for the establishment of the Central Information Commission?
(a) 	An order of the Supreme Court 	(b) A resolution of the Parliament
(c) 	An Act of the Parliament 	(d) A resolution of the Union Cabinet
11. The Central Information Commission falls under the:
(a) 	Ministry of Law
(b) 	Ministry of Home Affairs
(c) 	Ministry of Personnel
(d) 	Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
12. Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Central Information Commission is a high-powered independent body.
2. 	The Central Information Commission is a constitutional body.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
1. 	(c) 	2. 	(a) 	3. 	(a) 	4. 	(c) 	5. 	(d)
6. 	(a) 	7. 	(c) 	8. 	(b) 	9. 	(b) 	10. 	(c)
11. 	(c) 	12. 	(a)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 308] ---
State Information Commission | VIII.19
State Information Commission
Fifty Three
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The State Information Commission entertains complaints and appeals pertaining to offices,
financial institutions and public sector undertakings under the concerned state government.
2. 	The State Information Commission is a high-powered independent body.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	The State Information Commission submits its annual report to the:
(a) 	Governor of the State 	(b) High Court of the State
(c) 	State Legislature 	(d) State Government
3. 	How can a State Information Commissioner be removed from office?
(a) 	By the order of the State Chief Information Commissioner.
(b) 	By the order of Supreme Court of India.
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 309] ---
VIII.20 | Objective Indian Polity
(c) 	By the order of the Governor after the Supreme Court, on a reference made to it by the
Governor, has on inquiry reported that the State Information Commissioner ought to be
removed.
(d) 	In a manner similar to the removal of a Judge of a High Court.
4. 	Who of the following is not a part of the committee that recommends the appointment of the
State Chief Information Commissioner and the State Information Commissioners?
(a) 	A Judge of the State High Court
(b) 	The Chief Minister
(c) 	A State Cabinet Minister nominated by the Chief Minister
(d) 	The Leader of Opposition in the State Legislative Assembly
5. 	The salary, allowances and other service conditions of a State Information Commissioner are
similar to those of:
(a) 	The Chief Secretary of the State Government
(b) 	A Judge of the High Court of the State
(c) 	An Election Commissioner
(d) 	A member of the State Public Service Commission
6. 	The State Chief Information Commissioner holds office for:
(a) 	5 years or until the age of 65 years, whichever is earlier.
(b) 	5 years or until the age of 70 years, whichever is earlier.
(c) 	6 years or until the age of 70 years, whichever is earlier.
(d) 	6 years or until the age of 65 years, whichever is earlier.
7. 	The Right to Information Act of 2005, provides for the creation of the:
1. 	Central Information Commission
2. 	State Information Commission
3. 	Joint State Information Commission
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 3 	(b) 1 and 2
(c) 	1 and 3 	(d) 2 and 3
1. 	(c) 	2. 	(d) 	3. 	(c) 	4. 	(a) 	5. 	(a)
6. 	(a) 	7. 	(b)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 310] ---
Central Vigilance Commission | VIII.21
Central Vigilance Commission
Fifty Four
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Central Vigilance Commission was set up by an Act of Parliament.
2. 	The Central Vigilance Commission has been broadly given the measure of independence and
autonomy as that given to the Union Public Service Commission.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	Which one of the following is the main function of the Central Vigilance Commission?
(a) 	To keep a watch on the investigation agencies in the country
(b) 	To expedite the disposal of criminal cases pending in the courts
(c) 	To scrutinise the utilisation of developmental funds sanctioned by the Government
(d) 	To inquire or cause an inquiry of alleged offence of a public servant
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 311] ---
VIII.22 | Objective Indian Polity
3. 	The Central Vigilance Commission was established on the recommendation of
(a) 	Administrative Reforms Commission 	(b) National Development Council
(c) 	Committee on Prevention of Corruption 	(d) Law Commission
4. 	The salary, allowances and other service conditions of the Central Vigilance Commissioner are
similar to those of:
(a) 	A member of the UPSC 	(b) A judge of the Supreme Court
(c) 	The Chairman of the UPSC 	(d) The Chief Election Commissioner
5. 	The Parliament enacted a law conferring statutory status on the Central Vigilance Commission in:
(a) 	2000 	(b) 2002
(c) 	2003 	(d) 2005
6. 	The Central Vigilance Commission presents its annual report to the:
(a) 	Parliament 	(b) President
(c) 	Prime Minister 	(d) Home Minister
7. 	Which of the following institutions have been set up by Government of India to check miscon-
duct, malpractices, corruption and misdemeanour on the part of public servants?
1. 	Central Vigilance Commission
2. 	Lokpal
3. 	Special Police Establishment
4. 	Central Bureau of Investigation
Choose the correct answer by using the codes given below:
(a) 	2 and 3 	(b) 1 and 4
(c) 	3 and 4 	(d) 1, 3 and 4
8. 	The Government of India appointed a Committee on Prevention of Corruption under the chair-
manship of
(a) 	Ananthaswamy Ayyangar 	(b) P.V. Subbaiah
(c) 	K. Santhanam 	(d) K. Hanumanthayya
9. 	In which of the following years, the Central Vigilance Commission was set up?
(a) 	1962 	(b) 1966
(c) 	1967 	(d) 1964
10. Who of the following is not a member of the committee that recommends the appointment of
the Central Vigilance Commissioner?
(a) 	Prime Minister
(b) 	Home Minister
(c) 	Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha
(d) 	Speaker of the Lok Sabha
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 312] ---
Central Vigilance Commission | VIII.23
1. 	(b) 	2. 	(d) 	3. 	(c) 	4. 	(c) 	5. 	(c)
6. 	(b) 	7. 	(d) 	8. 	(c) 	9. 	(d) 	10. 	(d)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 313] ---
VIII.24 | Objective Indian Polity
Central Bureau of
Investigation
Fifty Five
1. 	Consider the following statements:
1. 	The Director of Central Bureau of Investigation as Inspector-General of Police, Delhi
Special Police Establishment, is responsible for the administration of the organisation.
2. 	With the enactment of CVC Act, 2003, the superintendence of Delhi Special Police
Establishment vests with the Central Government save investigations of offences under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, in which, the superintendence vests with the Central
Vigilance Commission.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 	Only 1 	(b) Only 2
(c) 	Both 1 and 2 	(d) Neither 1 nor 2
2. 	The Central Bureau of Investigation was set-up by:
(a) 	An Act of the Parliament
(b) 	An Amendment to the Constitution
(c) 	A Resolution of the Home Ministry
(d) 	A Resolution of the Personnel Ministry
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 314] ---
Central Bureau of Investigation | VIII.25
3. 	Statement I: 	The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) is a statutory body.
Statement II: The CBI derives its powers from the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act,
1946.
Codes:
(a) 	Both the statements are individually true and Statement II is the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(b) 	Both the statements are individually true but Statement II is not the correct explanation of
Statement I.
(c) 	Statement I is true but Statement II is false.
(d) 	Statement I is false but Statement II is true.
4. 	The Central Bureau of Investigation was set-up in:
(a) 	1962 	(b) 1963
(c) 	1964 	(d) 1965
5. 	The Central Bureau of Investigation comes under the administrative control of the:
(a) 	Ministry of Home Affairs 	(b) Cabinet Secretariat
(c) 	Prime Minister’s Office 	(d) Ministry of Personnel
6. 	Which of the following Committees/Reports recommended for the establishment of the Central
Bureau of Investigation?
(a) 	Santhanam Committee
(b) 	Administrative Reforms Commission
(c) 	P.H. Appleby Report
(d) 	A.D. Gorwala Report
7. 	Who of the following is the chairperson of the Committee recommending the appointment of
the Director of the Central Bureau of Investigation?
(a) 	Cabinet Secretary 	(b) Personnel Secretary
(c) 	Home Secretary 	(d) Central Vigilance Commissioner
1. 	(c) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(d) 	4. 	(b) 	5. 	(d)
6. 	(a) 	7. 	(d)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 315] ---
VIII.26 | Objective Indian Polity
Lokpal and Lokayuktas
Fifty Six
1. 	The Institution of Ombudsman was first introduced in:
(a) 	New Zealand 	(b) Norway
(c) 	Finland 	(d) Sweden
2. 	Which one of the following committees recommended the establishment of the institutions of
Lokpal and Lokayukta?
(a) 	Gorwala Committee
(b) 	Appleby Committee
(c) 	Administrative Reforms Commission
(d) 	Ashok Mehta Committee
3. 	At present, institutions for the redressal of citizen’s grievances in India include:
(a) 	Supreme Court and the Lokpal
(b) 	Lokpal and the Lokayukta
(c) 	Lokayukta and the Supreme Court
(d) 	Administrative Tribunals and the Lokpal
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 316] ---
Lokpal and Lokayuktas | VIII.27
4. 	Which of the following are major features of the institutions of Lokpal and Lokayukta as recom-
mended by the Administrative Reforms Commission?
1. 	They should be demonstrably independent and impartial.
2. 	They should compare with the highest judicial functionary in the country.
3. 	They should be directly accountable to Parliament.
4. 	Their appointments should as far as possible be non-political.
Select the correct answer by using the codes given below:
(a) 	1 and 4 	(b) 1, 2 and 4
(c) 	1, 2, 3 and 4 	(d) 2 and 3
5. 	Assertion (A): Lokayuktas have been appointed in all the States of India.
Reason (R): 	An independent institution is required to redress the grievances of the people
against the actions of civil servants.
Codes:
(a) 	Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct explanation of A.
(b) 	Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct explanation of A.
(c) 	A is true but R is false.
(d) 	A is false but R is true.
6. 	The Lokayukta and Uplokayuktas Act was first passed in:
(a) 	Maharashtra 	(b) West Bengal
(c) 	Karnataka 	(d) Odisha
7. 	The Administrative Reforms Commission (1966), recommended the establishment of ‘Lokpal’ in
India on the lines of Ombudsman of which of the following countries?
1. 	Finland 	2. Denmark
3. 	Norway 	4. Switzerland
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1, 2 and 4 	(b) 1 and 2
(c) 	1, 2 and 3 	(d) 3 and 4
8. 	The specific purpose of the institution of Lok Pal is to:
(a) 	Strengthen legislative control over administration
(b) 	Supplement judicial control over administration
(c) 	Protect and promote integrity in administration
(d) 	Enable effective popular control over administration
9. 	Which of the following States require(s) judicial qualifications for the appointment of Lokayukta?
1. 	Maharashtra
2. 	Rajasthan
3. 	Bihar
4. 	Andhra Pradesh
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 317] ---
VIII.28 | Objective Indian Polity
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 	1 only 	(b) 2 and 3
(c) 	4 only 	(d) 1 and 4
10. The office of Lokpal and Lokayukta in India is based on which one of the following?
(a) 	Parliamentary Commissioner of UK
(b) 	Ombudsman in Scandinavia
(c) 	Procurator General of Russia
(d) 	Council of State in France
1. 	(d) 	2. 	(c) 	3. 	(c) 	4. 	(b) 	5. 	(d)
6. 	(d) 	7. 	(c) 	8. 	(c) 	9. 	(c) 	10. 	(b)
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 318] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 319] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 320] ---
Other
Constitutional
Dimensions
Nine
Fifty Seven 	Co-operative Societies
Fifty Eight 	Official Language
Fifty Nine 	Public Services
Sixty 	Tribunals
Sixty One 	Rights and Liabilities of the Government
Sixty Two 	Authoritative Text of the Constitution in Hindi Language
Sixty Three 	Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam
--- [PDF PAGE 321] ---
downloaded from : www.visionias.net	downloaded from : https://t.me/Material_For_Exam